In the past, lectures were the traditional method of teaching large numbers of students in a classroom. Nowadays new technology is increasingly being used to teach students.
Some people think that students in single-sex schools perform better academically. Others, however, believe that mixed schools provide children with better social skills for adult life.
Road accidents are more frequent these days and claim many lives each year. As a result, some people suggest that drivers should take regular driving tests throughout their lives, rather than one single driving test, to improve the situation.
In the past, people used to travel to see the differences from their home country. However, the sceneries in places around the world seem similar nowadays.
Some people think computers and the Internet are important in children's study, but others think students can learn more effectively in schools and with teachers.
Shopping is the favourite free time activity for many young people today. Why do you think this has happened? Should young people be encouraged to do different activities in their free time rather than shopping?
Tourism today creates a variety of problems, such as pollution due to flights, traffic congestion and water pollution. Do you think that governments should impose extra taxes on flights or accommodation to restrict today’s tourism industry?
Nowadays many people have access to computers on a wide basis and a large number of children play computer games.
Some people say that now we can see films on our phones or tablets, and there is no need to go to the cinema. Others say that to be fully enjoyed, films need to be seen in a cinema.
Many working people get little or no exercise either during the working day or in their free time and have health problems as a result.
Some people say that music is a good way of bringing people of different cultures and ages together.
Most major cities around the world continue to grow at a phenomenal rate due to the massive increase in population. This has led to a general decline in the quality of life in city areas as the environment becomes more crowded and polluted.
Life has become much more stressful compared to our parent’s generation. As a result, stress-related illnesses are increasing around the world.
Unemployment remains the biggest challenge to school-leavers in most countries.

How far do you agree with this assessment? What other challenges face young people today?
Some employers offer their employees subsidized membership of gym or sports clubs, believing that this will make their staff healthier and thus more effective at work. Other employers see no benefit in so doing.
Countries around the world will be facing significant challenges relating not only to the environment but population and education as well. What problems will your country face in the next ten years? How can these problems be overcome?
The environmental problems that today's world is facing are so great that there is little ordinary people can do to improve the situation. So governments and large organizations should be responsible for reducing the amount of damage being done to the environment.
Fossil fuel, such as coal, oil and natural gas, is extensively used in many countries which cause harms to the environment. The use of alternative sources of energy, including wind and solar power, however, is being encouraged in many countries. Is this a positive or negative development?
The use of personal cars has increased more than ever before but this use of cars causes many problems. What are those problems? In order to reduce these problems, should we discourage people to use cars?
The news is an important source of knowledge for all of us about the world, especially in this era of technology. Journalists are mainly responsible to bring this news to us but not all of them are true to their responsibilities and ethics. How much can we trust the journalists?
Some people believe that it is important for young children to go to school as soon as possible. Others, however, believe that children should be allowed to stay at home and play until they are six or seven years old.
The main purpose of public libraries is to provide books, and they should not waste their limited resources and space on providing expensive hi-tech media such as computer software, videos and DVDs.
People generally know that the environment is important. However, most individuals still don't take responsibilities to protect the environment. Why is this? What should be done to encourage people to protect the environment?
When choosing a job, the salary is the most important consideration for many. Others, however, prefer different other aspects of a job over the salary they earn.
Nowadays plastic money replacements such as credit and debit cards are extremely popular, even more than banknotes and coins.
Some people say that in our modern age, it is unnecessary to teach children about the skills of handwriting.
A country becomes more interesting and develops more quickly when its population includes a mixture of nationalities.
The only way to reduce the amount of traffic in cities today is by reducing the need for people to travel from home to work, shopping and education.
Museums and art galleries should concentrate on local works rather than showing the cultures or artworks from other countries.
Cricket has become more popular than national sports in many subcontinental countries.
Some people think that studying history is a waste of time while others think it is essential for us to learn history.
Many people believe that university students should study a full range of subjects, instead of some specific subjects.
Many people join distance-learning programmes (study material, post, TV, Internet) and study at home, but some people think that it cannot bring the same benefit as attending colleges or universities does.
One of the consequences of improved medical care is that people are living longer and life expectancy is increasing.
For many, shopping malls are great places to spend their leisure time and meet others. People, however, in the past mostly visited shopping malls when necessary.
Some people believe that the best way to learn English is to study with native teachers.
Psychological illnesses may not be as obvious as physical disabilities or illnesses, nevertheless they are just as disabling in their own way. Society, however, is more accepting of those with physical than psychological illnesses or disabilities.
Some people believe that it is good to share as much information as possible in scientific research, business and the academic world. Others believe that some information is too important or too valuable to be shared freely.
Some people say that international sporting events contribute greatly to peace and stability in the world.
Some people think certain prisoners should be made to do unpaid community work instead of being put behind bars.
It is important that we maintain and protect the beautiful building of the past, even if it is expensive for countries to do so.
Some people say that your first impressions when you meet someone are always right.
Should education and healthcare be free of charge and funded by the government, or should it be the responsibility of the people to pay for these services?
Children in some parts of the world have less responsibility compared to children in the past. Some people think of this as a positive change, however, others think of it as a negative change.
Governments spend a lot of money on public celebrations such as national holidays and public festivals. Some people say that the government spends too much on this and that they should use this money on other useful things.
Some universities now offer their courses on the Internet so that people can study online.
In some countries, people prefer to rent a house for accommodation, while in other countries people prefer to buy their own house. Does renting a house have more advantages or disadvantages than buying a house?
In some schools and universities, girls tend to choose arts subjects (e.g. literature), and boys tend to choose science subjects (e.g. physics). Why do you think this is so? Should this tendency be changed?
It is necessary for parents to attend a parenting training course to bring their children up.
Some people think that instead of preventing climate change, we need to find a way to live with it.
Schools are spending more time teaching traditional subjects such as history. Some people think they should rather spend more time teaching skills that can help students find a job.
Buying things on the Internet, such as books, air tickets and groceries, is becoming more and more popular.
Due to so many young people dropping out of schools, the rate of unemployment is increasing, and it affects our society in different ways.
Children are facing more pressures nowadays from academic, social and commercial perspectives. What are the causes of these pressures and what measures should be taken to reduce this?
It is often said that nowadays children are undisciplined because their parents are busy with their career.
“Some experts opine that a new language should be introduced for all countries for international communication.”
Nowadays more people get married to someone of a different culture than they ever did.
Countries are becoming more and more similar because people are able to buy the same products anywhere in the world.
Some people believe that allowing children to make their own choices on everyday matters (such as food, clothes and entertainment) is likely to result in a society of individuals who only think about their own wishes. Other people believe that it is important for children to make decisions about matters that affect them.
In a number of countries, some people think it is necessary to spend large sums of money on constructing new railway lines for very fast trains between cities. Others believe the money should be spent on improving existing public transport.
Families who send their children to private schools should not be required to pay taxes that support the state education system.
More and more people are migrating to cities in search of a better life, but city life can be extremely difficult.
Some people claim that not enough of the waste from homes is recycled. They say that the only way to increase recycling is for governments to make it a legal requirement.
At the present time, the population of some countries includes a relatively large number of young adults, compared with the number of older people.
Over-fishing has become a very common practice in many countries. What do you think are the effects of over-fishing?
Due to the effects of globalisation, the cultures of some countries are influenced by others. Some people think this is a natural process. Others think this is a threat to cultural identity. What is your opinion about this?
Environmental problems are becoming a global issue. Environmental problems are counter-challenging the quality of life people enjoy in modern advanced societies.
Subjects such as Art, Sport and Music are being dropped from the school curriculum for subjects such as Information Technology. Many students suffer as a result of these changes.
Today’s food travels thousands of miles before it reaches customers. Why is this? Is this a positive or negative trend?
Youth drug abuse is a serious problem. What are the possible causes of this behaviour? Do you have any suggestion to control that?
Some people believe that living in an apartment instead of a university dormitory has many advantages while others say that it has many disadvantages.
Overpopulation in most developing countries in Asia and Africa is a problem. If these countries do not try to control the population immediately, they will face serious problems.
Developing countries like Bangladesh should concentrate more on industrial development, instead of agriculture, to achieve better development.
During the last twenty years, the assessment of students has undergone a major transformation. Many educational institutions have shifted their focus from traditional examination towards a variety of innovative assessment techniques, as they believe traditional examination results are not often true to student’s ability.
City planners’ new designs include setting up schools, markets and commercial places (like offices) in different areas of the city. Do you think it will help the city dwellers?
Modern appliances in the home have become more common, leaving no doubt that advances in technology have improved our lifestyle.
One of the major problems facing the world today is the growing number of refugees. The developed nations in the world should tackle this problem by taking more refugees. 
Nowadays many young people leave home at an early age to either study or work in a city. Why do you think they move to cities? Do you think this has more advantages or disadvantages for young people?
Some young people look forward to a year of travelling, a gap year, before they begin work or university and see it as a chance to broaden their horizons. For others, this is expensive and a waste of time
There is no doubt that the internet is one of the best modern inventions. It has made many things possible in our life while some people believe that it has brought some negative consequences too.
These days, in many countries, fewer and fewer people want to become teachers, particularly in secondary schools. What are the reasons for this, and how could the problem be solved?
Some people feel that education should be provided exclusively by the state, and private education should be prohibited.
With an increasing population communicating via the internet and text messaging, face to face communication will become a thing of the past.
Some people think that the public health of a country can be improved if the government make laws regarding nutritious food but others think that it is a matter of personal choice and personal responsibility.
Nowadays people normally stretch their work hours and get stressed than before. What are the reasons for this? What employers can do to make people’s life easier?
Nowadays many young people leave home at an early age to either study or work in another city. Do you think this has more advantages or disadvantages for young people?
Large businesses have big budgets for marketing and promotion and, as a result, people gravitate towards buying their products.
Some people fear that technology is gradually taking over control of our lives, while others think that it has led to many positive developments in all aspects of their lives.
Instead of teaching a broad range of subjects, a university should focus on those necessary for a given profession. Which do you prefer?
Some people think that the government is wasting money on the arts and this money could be better spent elsewhere.
Due to the development and rapid expansion of supermarkets in some countries, many small, local businesses are unable to compete. Some people think that the closure of local business will bring about the death of local communities.
Some people think paying taxes is a big enough contribution to their society, while others think people have more responsibilities as members of society than only paying taxes.
Some people think that watching sports in one's free time is just a waste of time.
Some people think that family life and parents have great influences on children’s development, while others consider that external influences play a more important role in children’s life.
Some people think men and women have different natural abilities that make them suitable for different types of work. Others, however, believe that both men and women can be equally suited to do any type of work.
Compare the advantages and disadvantages of three of the following as media for communicating information. State which you consider to be the most effective.
The widespread use of the Internet has brought many problems. What do you think are the main problems associated with the use of the Internet? What solutions can you suggest?
Many people believe that bicycle is a healthy and environmentally friendly mode of transport. However, it is still unpopular in many countries.
Although sports events are very popular, violence at these events is on the increase. Why is this so? What should authorities do to prevent violence from taking place at sports events?
Education and health care should be funded by the government and free for everyone.
All over the world, the rich are becoming richer and the poor are becoming poorer. What problems does this cause? How can we overcome the problems of poverty?
Some people consider computers to be more of a hindrance than a help. Others believe that they have greatly increased human potential. How could computers be considered a hindrance?
Some people think that because of email and telephone, communication among people is less personal now than it used to be.
These days, an increasing number of people are leaving rural areas to live in the city. Discuss some of the effects of rural depopulation (migration from the country to the city) and suggest some ways in which this trend could be reversed.
Many people say that smoking should be banned while others say it is not a good idea. What is your opinion on this?
Some people think it is better to educate boys and girls in separate schools. Others, however, believe that girls and boys benefit more from attending mixed schools.
All over the world, the rich are becoming richer and the poor are becoming poorer. What problems does this cause? How can we overcome the problems of poverty?
Children brought up in families with less money are better prepared for life than those from wealthy families.
Some people prefer shopping in shopping centres while others prefer local markets. What are the advantages of each? Which shopping experience do you prefer?
Very few school children learn about the value of money and how to look after it, yet this is a critical life skill that should be taught as a part of the school curriculum.
There are more cars on the roads these days and more accidents are happening. As a result, some politicians have suggested that people should take regular driving tests throughout their lives, rather than one single test.
Nowadays, more and more people decide to have children later in their life. What do you think are the reasons for this? Do the advantages of this trend outweigh the disadvantages?
Differences between countries become less evident each year. Nowadays, all over the world, people share the same fashions, advertising, brands, eating habits and TV channels.
Some people suggest that a country should try to produce all the food for its population and import as little food as possible.
Many governments think that economic progress is their most important goal. Some people, however, think that other types of progress are equally important for a country.
Many high-level positions in companies are filled by men even though the workforce in many developed countries is more than 50 percent female. So companies should be required to allocate a certain percentage of these positions to women.
Some people opine that increasing office hour is a reason for many social and personal problems and that is why it should be reduced to 35 hours in a week. What are the advantages and disadvantages of reducing the working week to 35 hours?
Some people claim that not enough of the waste from homes is recycled. They say that the only way to increase recycling is for governments to make it a legal requirement.
Some people say that the only reason for learning a foreign language is in order to travel to or work in a foreign country. Others say that these are not the only reasons why someone should learn a foreign language.
Governments should spend money on railways rather than roads.
Some people believe that the main purpose of schools is to turn children into good citizens and workers instead of benefitting them individually.
Sport is one of the most popular draws on television today. Some people argue that the practice of showing sport on television is to blame for the poor health of the young generation by encouraging them to watch rather than partake in physical activity.
The only way to improve the safety on our own road is to have stricter punishment for driving offenders.
Some people believe that all wild animals should be protected. Others say that few wild animals should be protected instead.
Some people say that education system is the only critical factor to the development of a country.
In many cities, an increasing number of people do not know their neighbours and the sense of community is lost. Discuss the causes and give measures to turn it around.
Some people think schools should group pupils according to their academic ability, but others believe pupils with different abilities should be educated together.
Using cell phones and computers made communication among people much easier. As a result, letter writing could be lost in the future.
Nowadays, more and more people are having consumer goods like refrigerators and washing machines.
In many countries, there is a shortage of housing due to a growing population. Some people argue that new towns should be built in the countryside, others argue for the regeneration of cities.
The quality of the health care a person receives should not depend on the size of their bank balance. The government is responsible for providing a high level of healthcare for all its citizens.
Many universities charge higher fees for foreign students. Why do they do this? Do you believe that it is fair?
In the future, we will have more and more leisure time as machines replace many of the tasks we do at home and work.
Many people decide on a career path early in their lives and keep to it. This, they argue, leads to a more satisfying working life. To what extent do you agree with this view? What other things can people do in order to have a satisfying working life?
It is commonly thought that it is healthy for adults to maintain an outside interest in order to relax or stay fit. Compare the advantages and disadvantages of 3 of the following sports and pastimes:
It is often said that crime is one of the main things that make the quality of life poorer. Crime in developed countries is one of the biggest problems in society. What are the causes of this problem and what measures can be taken to reduce it?
Nowadays in many countries, people are following the latest fashion, hairstyles and so on. Why are they so influenced by fashion? Is it a positive or a negative development?
In some countries, governments are encouraging industries and businesses to move to regional areas outside the big cities.
Students in many countries are encouraged to travel or work for a year before starting their university studies. Discuss the advantages and disadvantages for young people who decide to work or travel after finishing high school and starting education in a university.
Some people feel that the legal age at which people can marry should be at least 21.
Nowadays more and more older people compete with younger people for the same jobs. What can be the reasons for this? What would you suggest as a solution?
Rich countries should allow jobs for skilled and knowledgeable employees who are from poor countries.
The ease of international travel and the spread of various kinds of mass media all over the world have made it more possible than ever for people to know how other people live in other countries.
Psychologists have known for many years that colour can affect how people feel. For this reason, attention should be given to colour schemes when decorating places such as offices and hospitals.
Some people believe that the good leaders are born, whereas others hold the opinion that the leadership qualities could be obtained during the life. Who represents the good leader qualities indeed?
Buying fashionable clothes is wasteful because people don't need new clothes all the time. Clothing should be bought and used more wisely.
Some people say that giving a smaller amount of money weekly to children will help them become more capable as they grow older.
Environmental problems such as pollution and climate change affect all the people in the world. Although global decisions are made to reduce these problems, the solutions are not effective. Why are the solutions ineffective? How can these problems be solved?
The prevention of health problems and illness is more important than treatment and medicines. Government funding should reflect this.
Many people believe that companies and individuals should pay to clean up the environment in proportion to the amount of pollution they have produced.
Genetic engineering is an important issue in modern society. Some people think that it will improve people's lives in many ways. Others feel that it may be a threat to life on earth.
Many museums charge for admission while others are free. Do you think the advantages of charging people for admission to museums outweigh the disadvantages?
Some people think that all university students should study whatever they like. Others believe that they should only be allowed to study subjects that will be useful in the future, such as those related to science and technology.
Some people say that mobile phones should not be allowed in public places, others argue that people should be free to use their mobiles wherever they like.
Modern technology is now very common in the most workplaces. How do you think this has changed the way we work? Do you think there are disadvantages to relying too much on technology?
Nowadays it is more difficult for children to concentrate or pay attention in school. What could be the possible reasons for this? Which are the solutions you can propose?
In some countries, many more people are choosing to live alone nowadays than in the past. Do you think this is a positive or negative development?
It is important for children to learn the difference between right and wrong at an early age. Punishment is necessary to help them learn this distinction.
These days, children tend to spend a great deal of time playing computer games. Some believe this is a beneficial trend while others think it is detrimental.
Homework is a part of school life. Many people feel that giving homework daily to school children works well for them, while some feel it is an unnecessary burden on them. What do you think about it?
Longer life spans and improvements in the health of older people suggest that people over the age of sixty-five can continue to live full and active lives.
In many countries, young people are granted certain privileges and responsibilities at the age of sixteen. Clearly, parents have a responsibility to both care for and prepare their children as they approach this important milestone.
Some people believe that growing economy can be useful to those people who are poor and hungry. Others think that this can influence the environment.
It is becoming more and more difficult to escape the influence of the media on our lives. Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of living in a media rich society.
Some celebrities say that their private lives shouldn’t come under media scrutiny. Other people, however, believe that they should accept it as part of their fame.
Most employers do job interviews before offering a position to a person. Do you think this is the best way to do it, or are there better alternatives? What is the best method of choosing employees in your opinion?
Many people believe that social networking sites (such as Facebook) have a huge negative impact on both individuals and society.
Some people prefer to live in a house, while others feel that there are more advantages to living in an apartment. Are there more advantages than disadvantages of living in a house compared with living in an apartment?
Dieting can change a person’s life for the better or ruins one’s health completely. What’s your opinion on that?
It is very clear now that English should be the primary foreign language taught in all schools around the world. Learning a different foreign language before English is, in today’s world, a waste of time.
Educating children is a more difficult task today than it was in the past because they spend so much time on cell phones, online games, and social networking website.
Computer games have become widely popular and people spend a lot of time playing them. What are the negatives and positives of playing computer games and what can be done to reduce the bad effect?
In the recent years, there has been an increase in the number of people got killed on the road. Traffic designers blame drivers for driving too fast and drivers say the roads are bad. Who is to be blamed for the accidents deaths caused on roads?
Some people believe that a gap year between school and university is a good idea, while others disagree strongly. Consider both sides of this debate and present your own opinion.
Governments should spend more money on education than on recreation and sports.
People naturally resist making changes in their lives. What kind of problems can this cause? What solutions can you suggest?
In some countries, government safety laws include things such as wearing a hard hat on a building site or wearing safety clothes in certain factories. To what extent are laws of this kind good idea? What sort of safety law would you introduce, if you were given a chance?
In many countries, sports and exercises classes are replaced with the academic subjects.
With an increase in the number of privately owned vehicles, roads are becoming more congested. What measures could both government and individuals take to deal with this situation?
In your opinion, what incentives could be offered that would persuade more people to embrace electric cars?
Some people think that uniform at school is unnecessary and should be banned.
Many people strive to maintain a successful career and happy family life at the same time. What problems can this situation create? What are the possible solutions?
Throughout history, male leaders always lead us to violence and conflict. If a society is governed by female leaders, it will be more peaceful.
Some people think that both travellers and business people must have the same attitude to local people and the traditions of countries they visit.
Nowadays the way many people interact with each other has changed because of technology.  In what ways has technology affected the types of relationships people make? Has this become a positive or negative development?
Modern medical science has made it possible to combat many diseases. This is one reason that people are living longer lives now than they did in the past. Discuss the effects this might have on society.
Children nowadays spend a great deal of time watching television. However, television cannot replace the book as a learning tool, which is why children are less well-educated today.
With all the problems in the world today, spending money on space exploration is a complete waste. The money could be better spent on other causes.
Some people think that foreign visitors should be charged more than locals when they visit cultural and tourist attractions in a country.
Universities should allocate the same amount of money to students' sports activities as they allocate to their libraries. 
There was a time when people only shopped out of necessity but these days shopping seems to have become a new form of leisure activity. People do not appreciate the value of money anymore. 
Is it wise for an industry to replace its experienced but old workers with new and young individuals who have less experience? 
Home is the basic necessity of everyone. A government should provide home to those who cannot afford it.
Some people think that living in big cities is bad for people’s health.
Some people believe that exploring outer space is important because it expands human knowledge and might lead to discoveries that will benefit humanity in the future. Other people believe that space exploration is a waste of money that could be better spent solving immediate problems here on Earth.
Tourism is becoming increasingly important as a source of revenue to many countries, but its disadvantages should not be overlooked.
Throughout history, people have dreamed of living in a perfect society, but they have not agreed on what an ideal society would be like.
More and more companies are allowing employees to work at home. Do you think this is a positive or negative development?
These days more fathers stay at home and take care of their children while mothers go out to work. What could be the reasons for this? Do you think it is a positive or a negative development?
In your opinion, what has been the most significant transportation innovation of the past 200 years?
Many people say that the only way to guarantee a good job is to complete a course of university education. Others claim that it is better to start work after school and gain experience in the world of work.
Some experts believe that it is better for children to begin learning a foreign language at primary school rather than secondary school. Do the advantages of this outweigh the disadvantages?
World history suggests that violence and conflict were more evident under male leadership than under female leadership. So, for peace to prevail, female leadership can be considered as a better option than male leadership.
Some people think that spending a lot on holding wedding parties, birthday parties and other celebrations is just a waste of money.  Others, however, think that these are necessary for individuals and the society. 
Many people say that movies and TV programmes affect us negatively while others say that they are two influential and useful media for us. How do movies and TV affect us?
Money is important in most people's lives. Although some people think it is more important than others.
In recent years, life has become more stressful than it has ever been. As a consequence, more and more people are suffering from stress-related problems. What factors are contributing to this increase and what do you think can be done to overcome the current problems.
While many people say that parents are the best teachers, others simply state that teachers and our own experience are our best teachers. Who do you thinks is our best teacher?
Do you believe that professional athletes make good role models for young people?
Nowadays food has become easier to prepare. Has this change improved the way people live?
We are becoming increasingly dependent on computers. They are used in business, hospitals, crime detection and even to fly planes. What things will they be used in the future? Is this dependence on computers a good thing or should we be more suspicious of their benefits?
Nowadays we are producing more and more rubbish. Why do you think this is happening? What can governments do to help reduce the amount of rubbish produced?
People attend colleges or universities for many different reasons (for example, new experiences, career preparation, increased knowledge). Why do you think people attend colleges or universities?
Governments should not provide care or financial support for elderly people because it is the responsibility of each person to prepare for retirement and support him or herself.
Some parents buy their children a large number of toys to play with. What are the advantages and disadvantages for the child of having a large number of toys?
A gift (such as a camera, a soccer ball, or an animal) can contribute to a child’s development. What gift would you give to help a child develop? Why?
Some people say that there is no need to give international aid by governments as they already have unemployment and homeless in their own country.
Some people believe that sport has an important role in society. Others, however, feel that it is nothing more than a leisure activity for some people.
Some people think mothers spend most of their time raising their children, and therefore the government should support them.
Television is dangerous because it destroys family life and any sense of community; instead of visiting people or talking with our family members we just watch television.
Nowadays online shopping has become more popular than in-store shopping. Is it a positive or negative development?
Education is very important. How can children who are disinterested in the study to be motivated to learn?
Some people believe that the use of mobile phones in public is as annoying as smoking and should be banned, similarly.
The internet is viewed as an excellent means of communication by many. However, there are others who would argue that it is actually destroying our communication skills.
People in all modern societies use drugs, but today's youth are experimenting with both legal and illegal drugs, and at an increasingly early age. Some sociologists claim that parents and other members of society often set a bad example.
Some people who have been in prison become good citizens later and it is often argued that these are the best people to talk to teenagers about the dangers of committing a crime.
In your opinion, why is the circus still a popular form of entertainment in the modern electronic age?
Some people think placing advertisements in schools is a great resource for public schools that need additional funding, but others think it exploits children by treating them as a captive audience for corporate sponsors.
Without capital punishment our lives are less secure and crimes of violence increase. Capital punishment is essential to control violence in society.
International air travel has a negative impact upon the environment and should therefore be restricted.
Some people believe that sport has an important role in society. Others, however, feel that it is nothing more than a leisure activity for some people.
Overweight in many countries is a common problem and citizens’ health and fitness level is also decreasing. What are the causes of this problem and what could be done to tackle this problem?
It is observed in many countries that less and less people nowadays go to the cinema to watch movies. What could be the possible cause and solution of this?
The cost of international travel is decreasing and tourism is increasing in many countries. What are the advantages and disadvantages of the rising trend of tourism for countries?
In some countries children have very strict rules of behaviour, in other countries, they are allowed to do almost anything they want. To what extent should children have to follow rules?
Some people say that success is ‘10 percent talent and 90 percent hard work’. Is hard work the key to success, or is talent also important?
The international community must act immediately to ensure all nations to reduce their consumption of fossil fuels e.g. gas and oil.
Some people prefer to plan activities for their free time very carefully. Others choose not to make any plans at all for their free time. Compare the benefits of planning free-time activities with the benefits of not making plans.
To solve the ever-increasing environmental hazards throughout the world, the best way is to increase the price of fuel.
Most people believe that money is a very important consideration when choosing a job as it  can help you get better lifestyle; however, there are some who believe it is more important to have a job you enjoy and that this and not money will lead to greater happiness and more balanced personal life.
Some people think that students who do not take a break in studies between the high school and the university are at disadvantage compared to students that travel and work after high school before furthering their education.
The money given to help poor countries does not solve the problem of poverty, so rich countries should give other types of help instead.
The position of women in society has changed markedly in the last twenty years. Many of the problems young people now experience, such as juvenile delinquency, arise from the fact that many married women now work and are not at home to care for their children.
Deforestation caused by human activity is happening in many parts of the world, with serious results for the environment.
Children’s education is expensive. In some countries, governments pay partly or all education fees.
Today more people are travelling than ever before. Why is this the case? What are the benefits of travelling for the traveller?
In most parts of the world, people are living longer. What is the possible cause of this situation? Is this a negative or positive development?
Some people think that top level authorities of a company should always take suggestions or ideas from employees to take any decision while other disagree. 
Large shopping malls are replacing small shops. What is your opinion about this?
Some people think that cities are the best places to live. Others prefer to live in a rural area. Compare the advantages and disadvantages of living in the city to living in the countryside.
Students from rural areas often find it difficult to access university education. Some people think that universities should make it easier for them to access higher education.
Should parents be obliged to immunise their children against childhood diseases? Or do individuals have the rights to choose not to immunise their children?
In cities and towns all over the world, the high volume of traffic is a problem. What are the causes of this and what actions can be taken to solve this problem?
International entertainers, including sports personalities, often get paid millions of dollars in one year. In your view, with widespread poverty in the world, are these huge earnings justified?
Nowadays many jobs are more stressful and the working day is longer. What are the reasons for this? What can employers do to help employees?
In some countries, young people have little leisure time and are under a lot of pressure to work hard for their study.
The older generations tend to have very traditional ideas about how people should live, think and behave. However, some people believe that these ideas are not helpful in preparing younger generations for modern life.
Excessive personal vehicles is an issue; hence government should envisage other means for commuters.
Only experienced executives should be taking decisions in a company. Discuss and give your opinion.
The older you get, life becomes more complicated. Discuss.
Today the world has many urgent problems and solving them is possible by nations’ cooperation.
Education is a critical element of the prosperity of a nation. The more educated people are the more prosperous the country would be.
Some say that due to heavy traffic governments need to build more roads in metropolitan cities, while others argue this isn't the right solution.
In today's world, people are living longer than the past. What could be possible reasons for this? Many people think that this trend is negative for society.
There is a good deal of evidence that increasing car use is contributing to global warming and having other undesirable effects on people’s health and well-being.
Multicultural societies, in which there is a mixture of different ethnic peoples, bring more benefits than drawbacks to a country.
Although abuses of the system are inevitable, social welfare payments are essential to protect the rights citizens have to a guaranteed minimum income in a democratic society.
Few people devote time to hobbies nowadays. Say why you think this is the case and what effect this has on the individual and society in general.
Public transports in many countries have improved. People should use public transport to support pollution control initiatives.
Excessive population increase is raising the pressure on earth. Therefore it is individual's responsibility to utilise earthly resources adequately.
Sports events get the nations together and help alleviate the violence in the world.
People are becoming more materialistic than ever.
The crime rate among teenagers has increased dramatically in many countries. Discuss some possible reasons for this increase and suggest solutions.
Studying the English language in an English-speaking country is the best but not the only way to learn a language. 
Modern buildings change the character and appearance of towns and cities. The government should insist that new buildings be built in traditional styles to protect cultural identity.
Women and men are commonly seen as having different strengths and weaknesses. Is it right to exclude males or females from certain professions because of their gender?
Many people believe that young people enjoy life more than older people do.
Some businesses prohibit smoking in any of their offices. Some governments have banned smoking in all public places.
In recent years, there has been growing interest in the relationship between inequality and personal achievement. Some people believe that individuals can achieve more in more egalitarian societies. Others believe that high levels of personal achievement are possible only if individuals are free to succeed or fail according to their individual merits.
Some people say that non-vegetarian food should be banned.
In the past lecturers could teach a certain number of students in one lecture hall. With the development of new technology, it is hard to justify the reason to participate in the lecture physically and not via the Internet.
It is generally accepted that families are not as close as they used to be. Give reasons why this change has happened and suggest how families could be brought closer together?
People in all modern societies use drugs, but today's youth are experimenting with both legal and illegal drugs, and at an increasingly early age. Some sociologists claim that parents and other members of society often set a bad example.
Besides a lot of advantages, some people believe that the Internet creates many problems.
Some people think that managers alone should make decisions in the company, while others think that employees should be involved in the decision-making process too.
In a public-funded healthcare system, people who are willing to pay for the best and fast treatment should be able to do so.
Some people think that men and women should have an equal position in the army while others oppose this by stating that women are not as competent as men in the army.
Many people think that alternative sources of energy should be utilized right now.
Old age people should be taken care by the government and it is not the responsibility of the family.
The wealth gap between 1st world countries and 3rd world countries seems to be increasing. How can we reduce this gap? Do you think that developed countries have a duty to assist developing countries in every way?
Trade and travel would be a lot easier with a single, global currency that we all use.
When students are in large classes it is very hard for the teachers to give every student individual attention. What can educational authorities do about this?
Smoking can cause serious illnesses and should be made illegal.
An increasing number of larger shopping areas, malls and department stores are leading to the decline of smaller corner shops. What are the advantages and disadvantages of shopping in larger shopping centres rather than smaller, more traditional shops?
Should travelling be included in the education? Discuss and give your opinion.
Some practical skills such as money management should be taught in high school.
Even though organic fruits and vegetables are more expensive than conventional fruits and vegetables they are worth the extra cost.
Many people believe that we have become a 'disposable' society, throwing things away rather than repairing them and reusing them. Why do you think that is? What are some of the possible problems this can cause?
As countries have developed there has been a trend towards smaller family sizes. Why does this happen? How does this affect society?
Modern technology has a great impact on our environment. Some say that people should adopt a simple lifestyle to solve this problem, while others argue that the technology itself should provide a solution.
People nowadays are not fit and active than the people from the olden days. Discuss the causes for this situation and suggest some possible solutions.
There have been many technological developments in the 20th century, for example in transport, telecommunications and health.  What technological development do you think has been the most important? How has it changed people's lives? Have all the changes been positive?  
Nowadays, anyone can post information on the internet even if it is incorrect. As a result, most of the information we read is inaccurate.
Some people think they should keep all the money they earn without paying taxes, others disagree.
International tourism has brought enormous benefit to many places. At the same time, there is concern about its impact on local inhabitants and the environment.
People today often buy new things instead of fixing the old things. Discuss the causes and effect of this.
As the number of private cars has increased, so too has the level of pollution in many cities. What can be done to tackle this increasingly common problem?
Some people choose a career according to the social status and salary it will give them. Others choose a career according to whether they will enjoy the work.
Fresh water has always been a limited resource in some parts of the world. Today, however, growing worldwide demand has made this a global problem. What are the causes of the increased demand and what measure could governments and individuals take to respond to this problem?
Many people want their country to host an international sporting event. Others believe that international sporting events bring more problems than benefits. 
Some people believe that the government should ban dangerous sporting activities while others think that people have the freedom do whatever sports they choose.
Modern lifestyles mean that many parents have little time for their children. Many children do not get as much attention from their parents as children did in the past.  
Crime is nearly always related to the environment in which it occurs. For this reason, international laws and international law courts are unrealistic and will not succeed in reducing crime levels in different countries. Discuss. 
Tobacco and alcohol are drugs that cause addiction and health problems. Therefore they should be made illegal. 
People are now living longer than ever before and many old people are unable to look after themselves. Some people believe that it is the responsibility of families to look after the elderly, while others say governments should provide retirement homes for them where they can be looked after properly. Discuss.
Newspapers and books are outdated. Why do some people believe this? What is your opinion? 
The only way to cut the crime rate is building more prisons and make prison sentences longer. 
Nowadays many jobs are more stressful and the working day is longer. What are the reasons for this? What can employers do to help employees? 
The education a child receives at home from having parents who are positive role models is more important than the academic education a child receives at school.  
In some countries today, there is an attitude that ‘anyone can do it’ in the arts – music, literature, acting, art, etc. As a result, people with no talent become rich and famous and genuine talent is not valued or appreciated. 
'Telecommuting' refers to workers doing their jobs from home for part of each week and communicating with their office using computer technology. Telecommuting is growing in many countries and is expected to be common for most office workers in the coming decades. How do you think society will be affected by the growth of telecommuting?
Some people believe in the traditional idea that the woman’s place is in the home, while others say that idea is outdated and that women should play an increasingly important role in the workplace of the future. 
What are the factors which are related to academic success in high-school students?
More and more businesses, as well as individuals, are choosing to communicate either professionally or socially using technology rather than being face to face.
Some people claim that what many people eat in western countries is unhealthy food and that their diet is getting worse. Critics say that these countries should change their diet.
When a country develops its technology, the traditional skills and ways of life die out. It is pointless to try and keep them alive.
Young drivers are careless and overconfident, and too many are killed in accidents. To eliminate this problem, we could teach children the skills of safe driving while they are at schools. 
Students should continue their study abroad than to study at home. 
Some believe that global warming is the most pressing environmental problem which we have at the moment; others believe that deforestation has a more devastating impact on our world.
Many people choose to take a year out between finishing school and starting university in order to gain work or experience to travel. The experience of non-academic life thus offers benefits the individual when they return to education.
People work hard to buy more things in life. This has made our life more comfortable but it is pity that many traditional values have been lost on the way to such materialism.
In recent time economic growth has made some people richer in both developed and developing countries. While studies show that people in developing countries are happier now than before, people in developed countries are no happier than they were before.
What are the factors which are related to academic success in high-school students?
Some people say that health care and education should be the responsibility of the government but others think that it is the responsibility of the individuals themselves.
Some people always want the newest products made by technology. Why is this so? Is this a bad or a good thing?
Many people prefer to watch foreign films than locally produced films. Why could this be? Should governments give more financial support to local film industries?
Children in many countries are engaged in paid jobs. Many regard it as a harmful trend while others consider it as a valuable work experience, important for learning and taking responsibilities.
Nowadays, traffic is a serious problem in big cities. Why this is so and what effects does it bring?
Many people say that the only way to guarantee getting a good job is to complete a course of university education. Others claim that it is better to start work after school and gain experience in the world of work.
Learning a foreign language offers an insight into how people from other cultures think and see the world. The teaching of a foreign language should be compulsory at all primary schools.
To what extent will migration from the developing world to the developed world become a social and political issue in the 21st century?
Some young adults want independence from their parents as soon as possible. Other young adults prefer to live with their families for a longer time. Which of these situations do you think is better?
The position of women has changed a great deal in many societies over the past 50 years. But these societies cannot claim to have achieved gender equality.
Nowadays many people work part or full time from home. Some people say that working from home has many benefits while others disagree.
A growing number of people feel that animals should not be exploited by people and that they should have the same rights as humans, while others argue that humans must employ animals to satisfy their various needs, including uses for food and research.
A group of people say that Internet access for minors can be dangerous.
A group of people say that increasing the number of sports facilities would ensure the improvement in public health. Others, however, disagree with this view and say that this would have very little effect on promoting public health and other initiatives should be taken.
Choose one of the following transportation vehicles and explain why you think it has changed people's lives.

Automobiles, bicycles, airplanes.
It has been said that the world is becoming a global village in which there are no boundaries to trade and communication.
People listen to music for different reasons and at different times. Why is music important for many people?
Television has brought great changes to the way many children spend their leisure time. While some of these changes have been beneficial, others have had a harmful effect.
Damage to the environment is an inevitable consequence of worldwide improvements in the standard of living.
Advanced technologies like cell phone tracking and security cameras are being used to monitor people’s activities. In many cases, people who are being monitored are unaware of that and many people oppose the use of such monitoring for this reason. Others, however, say that to track crimes it is important to use such technology.
The number of overweight people in many countries is increasing alarmingly and the level of their fitness is decreasing. Why is this happening? What can be done to solve this pressing issues?
Today people have unhealthy diets and do not exercise. What do you think why it is so. What are the reasons? Suggest some solutions for solving this situation.
School should prepare students for the university rather than work. How far do you agree with this statement?
As a result of medical sciences, the average life expectancy is increasing for men and women.

Do you think most people see it as a positive development?
What are disadvantages of the ageing population for individuals and society?
Education is a critical element of the prosperity of any nation. The more educated the people of the country are, more successful their nation becomes.
A huge number of students choose to study English independently on a self-study basis rather than attend a formal course. However, without the assistance of a teacher, students often find it difficult to manage their studies.
Sport today is turning into a business and there are companies involved that sponsor sports with ever growing prize money for the sportsman as a part of their advertising. Some people agree to this because it has a good effect on the world of sports, others however disagree.
Nowadays, some employees give increasing importance to employing people with social skills in addition to good qualifications. So it is widely accepted that social skills are as important as good qualifications.
Zoos are sometimes seen as necessary but not poor alternatives to a natural environment.
Some people say that the purpose of education is to prepare individuals to be useful to society. Others say its purpose is to prepare individuals to achieve personal ambitions.
Some people say that schools should spend more money on computers, others say that more money should be spent on teachers' wages.
Usually, students have to study a range of different subjects. Some people believe that learning subjects without being interested in them won’t be beneficial.
Nowadays most students either work to get some work experience or go abroad before their university start. Are these students distinct from others in their university studies?
Some people believe that animal husbandry is the biggest factor causing global warming.
In many countries today, the eating habit and lifestyle of children are different from those of previous generations. Some people say this has had a negative effect on their health.
Recent research has shown that media like the Internet and TV have a greater influence over people’s lives than politicians.
Air travel has brought negative impacts to the environment and therefore should be restricted.
Some people opine that cinema will eventually lose its appeal to mass people and very few people will go to cinema halls.
Some people regard the video games as harmless fun, or even as a useful educational tool. Others, however, believe that videos games are having an adverse effect on the people who play them.
Students should pay the full cost of their own university studies, rather than have free higher education provided by the state.
The news is a source of knowledge about the world. How much can we trust the journalists? What are the qualities a good journalist should have?
In many countries, the gap between the rich and poor is increasing. The rich people are becoming richer while the poor is growing poorer.
To what extent is the use of animals in scientific research acceptable?
Education is one of the most important aspects of the development of a country. How can education be improved in your country?
While some people opine that computers have made our life more convenient and easier, others, however, oppose it and say that computers have actually made our life more complex and stressful.
Some people say that new advancements in factory farming and the creation of new combinations of fruits and vegetables are not beneficial while others disagree with this opinion.
'Telecommuting' refers to workers doing their jobs from home for part of each week and communicating with their office using computer technology. Telecommuting is growing in many countries and is expected to be common for most office workers in the coming decades. How do you think society will be affected by the growth of telecommuting?
The incidence of crimes and atrocities committed by the youth is increasing like wildfire in most cities around the world.
To be labeled a ‘Work of Art’, a painting, sculpture or other art forms should display certain qualities that are unique. However, over the past century, there has been a decline in the quality of prize-winning artwork and it is now possible for quite ordinary pieces of art to be labeled ‘masterpieces’ whilst true works of art pass unnoticed.
Many people are of the opinion that putting criminals in prison is not severe enough as a form of punishment. Others, however, believe that imprisonment is one of the most effective ways of punishing wrong-doers.
Modern technology plays a vital role in preventing and solving crimes in society.
Overpopulation is increasing at an irreversible pace everywhere in the world. In order to control this, it is high time governments should start imposing monetary fines on people having more than one child.
More and more people are relying on the private car as their major means of transportation. Describe some of the problems over-reliance on cars can cause, and suggest at least one possible solution.
More and more students are choosing to study at colleges and universities in a foreign country. Do the benefits of studying abroad outweigh the drawbacks?
Many people think that students who go to university directly from school benefit less and can contribute less to their courses than those who travel or do jobs before they start their university education.
Some people think that excessive use of mobile phones and computers badly affects teenagers' writing and reading skills.
Many people think that increasing the number of sports facilities is the best way to improve the public health. Others, however, say that this is not an effective way of improving the public health and other measures should be taken.
The continued rise in the world’s population is the greatest problem faced by humanity at the present time.
Television has changed the quality of life for the ordinary person.
Though we learn many valuable things from our teachers, friends, colleagues and relatives, parents are still our best teachers in our life.
Many people nowadays work from home and this has been possible mainly because of the advancement of computer and internet technology.
Some people believe that advertisements targeting children may have negative effects on them, and suggest banning such advertisements as a solution.
Groups or organizations are an important part of some people's lives. Why are groups or organizations important to people?
The rate of unemployment in some countries is high. Because of this, there is no need to complete an education beyond a primary school level.
Overpopulation of urban areas has led to numerous problems. Identify one or two serious ones and suggest ways that governments and individuals can tackle these problems.
Some people consider thinking about and planning for the future to be a waste of time. They argue that people should simply live in the moment.
It is generally believed that the internet is an excellent means of communication but some people suggest that it may not be the best place to find information.
The quality of life in large cities is decreasing. What could be the reasons behind this? What measures can be taken to resolve this problem?
Many people want their country to host an international sporting event. Others believe that international sporting events bring more problems than benefits.
The government should put every effort to save the citizen from natural disaster.
All museums and art galleries should be free because they are an important part of a countries culture.
Some people warn that the era of the silver screen is coming to an end and that people will eventually lose interest in going to the cinema.
Every government has a duty to provide free health care for its people. What are the advantages and disadvantages of government providing free healthcare?
Due to the change in women’s roles in modern society, men are now the ones suffering from sexual discrimination.
Young people should spend more time on cultural activities such as music and theatre and less time on sport.
Many people have complained about the large salaries paid to top executives of major companies. Why do you think top executives are so well paid? Do you think their large salaries are justified?
In many countries, very few young people read newspapers or follow the news on TV. What do you think are the causes of this? What solutions can you suggest?
Over the past fifty years, international sports events such as the Olympic Games and World Cup competitions have played an increasingly important role in our society. However, these days, many people think such events are an enormous waste of money, time and effort.
In general, people do not have such a close relationship with their neighbours as they did in the past. Why is this so and what can be done to improve contact between neighbours?
Some people believe it is better for governments to spend any available money for sports on providing facilities for the general population. Others believe that instead, they should invest in training top athletes to win major competitions.
Homeschooling belongs to the past and is unacceptable in the modern society.
The camera has changed the way we look at the world and the way that we celebrate special occasions.
A person’s worth nowadays seems to be judged according to social status and material possessions. Old-fashioned values, such as honour, kindness and trust, no longer seem important.
It is often difficult for young people to find a good job without previous work experience. Governments should encourage employers to choose young people when they need new workers.
Some governments try to control the way a national language is used. For example, they may restrict the introduction of foreign words, or the use of dialects, or they may demand that a certain language be used in schools. What are the benefits and disadvantages of these policies? Do you think they can ever be effective?
There are many ways of preventing crimes that are much better than prison.
In some countries, it can be difficult for people over the age of 50 to get good jobs, despite their experience. What do you think are the causes of this problem, and what measures could be taken to solve it?
Some countries have laws that prohibit animals being used in circuses or other forms of entertainment because it is cruel to keep animals in an environment that can cause them stress. Should all countries have laws to prevent animals being used in circuses and similar forms of entertainment?
Learning a foreign language offers an insight into how people from other cultures think and see the world. The teaching of a foreign language should be compulsory at all primary schools.
In many countries, television shows many foreign-made programmes. The dominance of imported entertainment is harmful to the cultures of these countries.
Hunting animals is one of the mankind’s earliest instincts and, therefore, should not be restricted.
According to a recent study, the more time people use the Internet, the less time they spend with real human beings. Should we worry about the effect this is having on social interaction or should we see the Internet as a way of opening up new communication possibilities worldwide?
In many parts of the word, there is continuous coverage of sport on television. Some people believe this discourages the young from taking part in any sport themselves.
The world has seen an enormous increase in flights for leisure, business and commercial purposes around the world over recent years.
As the population of the world is growing very quickly, the only long-term solution to the problem of overpopulation is for humans to settle on other planets. What benefits has the world got from space exploration? Do you think humans will ever live on other planets?
Some people think it would be a good idea for schools to teach every young person how to be a good parent. 
In many countries these days, the number of people continuing their education after school has increased, and the range of courses available at universities and colleges has also increased.
In many countries insufficient respect is shown to older people. What do you think may be the reason for this? What problems might this cause in society?
Compared to our parent’s generation, life has become much more stressful. As a result, stress-related illnesses are on the increase around the world.

Why is stress such a problem in the modern world and what do you think can be done to overcome the problems caused by stress?
Even though doctors all over the world agree that fast food is bad for people's health more and more people are eating it. Why are more people eating fast food? What can be done about this problem?
Many old buildings are protected by law because they are part of a nation’s history. However, some people think old buildings should be knocked down to make way for new ones because people need houses and offices. 
Some people think that the main influence on young people's diet is advertising rather than family and friends.
Some people regard work as the most important thing in life and have little interest in anything else. Other people are more enthusiastic about their hobbies and leisure interests than their jobs.
In the modern world, there is a movement away from written exams to more practical assessment. 
Some people think the latest technology for home entertainment such as sophisticated TVs, high-speed internet connections and tablets are having a negative impact on people's lives, especially young people. 
Museum and historical sites are mainly visited by tourists, not the local people. Why is this so? What could be done to encourage more local visitors?
The world is consuming natural resources faster than they can be renewed. Therefore, it is important that products are made to last. Governments should discourage people from constantly buying up-to-date or fashionable products.
Public transport is essential but problematic. Describe some of the problems connected to public transport and suggest some solutions.
Some people think it is very important to get a university education. Others feel we should encourage more young people to take up a trade such as plumbing, painting or building to ensure a good balance of skills in our society.
Some people choose to eat no meat or fish. They believe that this is not only better for their own health but also benefits the world as a whole.
Some people think that managerial posts in private companies and in government are more suitable for men. Others think that given the opportunity women can be successful managers.
Some people say children no longer need to develop handwriting skills. Others believe that handwriting is still important.
Over the past few decades, with the help of the internet, an unimaginable amount of information has become widely available to the general public. What do you think are the advantages and disadvantages of this development?
Larger proportions of people live and work in other countries today than at any time in the past. It is probable that in the future there will be no borders and people will be able to move freely between countries.
Some people think that changing people's attitudes to other countries and cultures is an important factor in reducing world poverty. Others, however, feel that the most important method is the trade.
It is believed by many people that ‘If people have more money, they are generally happier.’
Some people think that the increasingly flexible working environment nowadays, such as working at home, has a positive impact on workers' lives. Others, however, feel this development is just a means for organisations such as private companies to exploit workers for profit.
In some countries today, there is an attitude that ‘anyone can do it’ in the arts – music, literature, acting, art, etc. As a result, people with no talent become rich and famous and genuine talent is not valued or appreciated.
Encouraging the development of creative industries such as the production of video games and computer software is the best way to reduce youth unemployment.
In some parts of the world traditional festivals and celebrations have disappeared or are disappearing. What do you think are the causes of this development and what measures could be taken to solve it?
Governments spend millions of dollars each year on their space programmes. Most recently, Mars is the focus of scientists’ attention. Some people think this money would be better spent on dealing with problems closer to home.
Some people think that strict punishments for driving offences are the key to reducing traffic accidents. Others, however, believe that other measures would be more effective in improving road safety.
Advertising campaigns on TV that are targeted at children should be banned.
To get a good job today, it is more important for children to study mathematics and foreign languages than art and music.
Some people think that it is wrong for humans to search for new worlds in space when we have so many problems on our own planet. Others believe such searches help mankind to develop.
The government spends about £220 million a year supporting museums and galleries in the UK, and a similar amount subsiding the visual and performing arts. This is a huge sum to spend on minority interests and the money would be better spent on more important things. It should be up to the people who enjoy cultural attractions to pay for them.
Some people opine that entertainment or leisure activities should be subsidized by the government.
Some people believe that education is the key to tackling hunger worldwide, while others feel that the answer lies in food aid.
Working hours are too long and people are not spending as much time as they should with their families or on leisure activities.
Many people like to wear fashionable clothes. Why do you think this is the case? Is this a good thing or a bad thing?
Nowadays the way modern society is developing is being shaped by people's migration to large cities. In what ways is the migration to large cities affecting society? Has this become a positive or negative development?
Cinema attendance in some countries is on the decline. What do you think are the causes of this development and what measures could be taken to solve it?
All countries throughout the world are facing health issues related to modern lifestyles. What do you think are the causes of these problems and what measures could be taken to solve them?
Some people get into debt by buying things they don’t need and can’t afford. What are the reasons for this behaviour? What action can be taken to prevent people from having this problem?
Nowadays technology is increasingly being used to monitor what people are saying and doing (for example, through cell phone tracking and security cameras). In many cases, the people being monitored are unaware that this is happening.
The internet allows us to stay connected with each other no matter where we are. On the other hand, it also isolates us and encourages people not to socialise.
In the past, when students did a university degree, they tended to study in their own country. Nowadays, they have more opportunity to study abroad. What are the advantages and disadvantages of this development?
In some parts of the world, it is becoming increasingly popular to try to find out the history of someone’s family.
We never know when the natural disaster will shatter an area and that is why the government should take every precaution to protect its citizens from natural disaster.
As mass communication and transport continue to grow, societies are becoming more and more alike leading to a phenomenon known as globalization. Some people fear that globalization will inevitably lead to the total loss of cultural identity.
Tourism is one of the fastest growing industries and contributes a great deal to economies around the world. However, the damage tourism can cause to local cultures and the environment is often ignored.
Many people prefer to read and tell stories to their children and regard it as a good opportunity to establish a stronger parent-child relationship. Others, however, think that parents do not need to do that and children should read books, watch TV and movies by themselves.
Some people say that public libraries should be free, otherwise they are just a waste of money, especially because modern technologies and the internet allow easy access to resources.
Some people consider sport to be their career and role in the society. For others, it is mostly a workout to keep them fit.
Some people believe that history is very important and we must study the past to understand the present. Others say that it has little or no use at all.
The technological advancement has changed the way people interact with each other. How the technology has affected the way people make and maintain relationship nowadays? Is this a positive or negative development?
Smoking is prohibited in public places in many countries. Many office authorities also impose restrictions on smoking within the office premises. While many people welcome this restriction and suggest that smoking should be banned, others, however, feel that it takes away some of our freedom.
Recycling is a pointless activity, it is fraught with inefficiency. Governments need to develop policies to tackle waste and other issues at source.
In some countries, it is thought advisable that children begin formal education at four years old, while in others they do not have to start school until they are seven or eight.
Many universities charge higher fees for foreign students. Why do they do this? Do you believe that it is fair?
During the 20th century, contact between different parts of the world has developed rapidly and thanks to air travel and telecommunication for this.

To what extent do you agree that societies benefit from the increased contact and closer relationships with foreigners brought by international tourism and business?
Should the government impose a heavy tax on private car owners to improve the public transportation system to reduce the traffic problem in many cities?
Nuclear technology can be used for the advancement and betterment of the world and at the same time it can be a great threat for the people of the world.  Do you support that the nuclear technology should be used for constructive purposes?
In past days zoos used to play an important role to educate people about the wildlife as well as safeguard the endangered animals. But nowadays the zoos have no useful purpose.
Should parents read or tell stories to their children or should the children be encouraged to read books, watch movies or TV all by themselves?
As children become adults, their social behaviour changes in some ways.What are the main differences between young children’s social behaviour and that of adults?
Smoking not only harms the smoker, but also those who are nearby. Therefore, smoking should be banned in public places.
Many criminals commit crimes after they were set free. Research indicates that the people who were convicted criminals would often commit crimes when they are set free. Why is this the case? What can be done to solve this issue?
Some people argue that it is more important to have an enjoyable job than to earn a lot of money. Others disagree and think that a good salary leads to a better life.
Television is dangerous because it destroys family life and any sense of community; instead of visiting people or talking with our family we just watch television.
Some people think that museums (and galleries) should be enjoyable places to entertain people, while others believe that the purpose of museums is to educate. Discuss both views and give your opinion.
Young people in the modern world seem to have more power and influence than any previous young generation.
Some people say that technology has improved our lifestyle and has given the opportunity to enjoy more leisure time. Others, however, say that we have less leisure time than the time when technology had little influences on us.
The main reason people go to work is to earn money. To what extent do you agree or disagree?
It is a fact that people are under more pressure nowadays and their lives are becoming increasingly stressful. What could be the possible reasons for this? What are some solutions to address this issue?
Nowadays animal experiments are widely used to develop new medicines and to test the safety of other products. Some people argue that these experiments should be banned because it is morally wrong to cause animals to suffer, while others are in favour of them because of their benefits to humanity.
People’s lives are becoming increasingly stressful nowadays and there are many reasons behind this. Many people relate this to technological advancement while others say that high living costs and competitions are the main reasons for this stressful life we have.
Many people believe that inherent talent is more important than practice in many fields like sport or music. According to them great musicians and sportsmen are born and can’t be created. However, others claim that talent has little to do with success and any child can be taught to become a great sports person or musician.
School authorities should not spend time and money on music classes and more emphasize should be given to useful subjects like science, computer and technology.
Some people argue that it is parents’ duty to teach their children to be good members of the society. Others, however, disagree with this statement and opine that children should learn this from their school and teachers should play the vital role to prepare them as ideal members of society.
Most people spend a great deal of time at work; therefore job satisfaction is an important part of being happy in life. What elements are required for job satisfaction? It is possible for all workers to achieve job satisfaction.
Many people think that employing and exploiting animals for basic human needs is totally justified while others opine that animals should not be exploited by people and they should have the same rights as humans.
Some of the methods used in advertising are unethical and unacceptable in today’s society.
Money and time spent on music classes in schools are not necessary and this budget and time would be better utilised if they are spent on more useful subjects like computer, math and science.
International tourism and international trade are two important aspects of the development of the economy of a country and a country can get numerous benefits from the close relationship it maintains with foreign countries.
In the past, shopping was a routine domestic task. Many people nowadays regard it as a hobby.
The advantage of the spread of English as a global language will continue to outweigh its disadvantages.
Many people say that music lesson in schools is very important for the children while others oppose this idea. They say that the time and money spent on music classes in schools are not necessary and children should focus on more important subjects like science, math and computer rather than wasting time in music lessons.
Many people spend a lot of time using communication technology. What are the reasons for this? What is the impact of it on the relationships with their families and other people?
The role of prisons should be to punish criminals who have committed serious crimes. Training courses and education offered to prisoners are a waste of taxpayer's money. To what extent do you agree or disagree?
Many people prefer to spend their holidays staying at home and doing things that they usually can’t do because of a busy schedule. Others, however, prefer to get away from their usual routine and prefer to spend time in a different location in a hotel, camping in the countryside or visiting other cities. Which one according to you is the better way of spending an ideal holiday? What are the benefits of going away on holidays?
Education is the single most important factor in the development of developing countries.
To some people studying the past has little value in the modern world. Why do you think it is important to learn the past? What will be the effect if children are not taught history?
In most countries disabled people are not catered adequately, e.g. buildings are often inappropriately designed. Governments rely heavily on charities and voluntary organizations to provide assistance and funding.
The first car appeared on the British roads in 1888. By the year 2000, there may be as many as 29 million vehicles on British roads.
Most of us rely on newspapers as the primary source of news and information and newspapers have a great influence on us.
Many schools face severe problems with student behaviour and day by day this is getting even worse. What do you think are the reasons for this problem? What can be done to solve it?
There are many reasons that can be attributed for attending colleges and universities; for example, job opportunity, new experience, enhancing knowledge etc. In your opinion what are the main reasons for people to attend colleges and universities?
The increased use of text messaging using mobile phones is largely to blame for the falling standards in written English, particularly among young people, many of whom are unable to construct grammatically correct sentences.
In some countries, young people at the age of 18 are considered adults and can drive a car, vote and get married, while other countries don't allow it. What age do you think is the best to be considered an adult? Give reasons and examples.
Some people consider public libraries to be unnecessary due to the availability of the Internet. Others, however, believe that libraries play an important role in society.
Many people believe that professionals in certain fields like film, sports and music are heavily overpaid while other important professionals like doctors and teachers are poorly paid.
In many sub-continent countries like India, Pakistan and Sri Lanka, Cricket has become more popular than the national sports of these countries.
Is it better for students to live at home with their parents or in school accommodation?
Advertising is all around us; it is an unavoidable part of everyone's life. Some people say that advertising is a positive part of our lives while others say it is a negative one.
Some people consider computers to be more of a hindrance than a help. Others believe that they have greatly increased human potential. How could computers be considered a hindrance or a potential for the human?
Some people feel that entertainers (e.g. film stars, pop musicians or sports stars) are paid too much money.
The fashion trends nowadays change very rapidly and it is quite difficult to follow the latest trends always. Many people believe that the fashion trends primarily exist just to sell clothes and they also argue that following them is just a waste of time and we should dress what we feel comfortable in.
It is generally accepted that families are not as close as they used to be. Give some reasons why this change has happened and suggest how families could be brought closer together.
It is better to promote healthy lifestyle than to treat the ill. More budgets should be spent on improving people’s healthy lifestyle in order to prevent illness than to spend money for the treatment of the ill people.
Increasing the price of the petrol is the best solution to traffic jam and pollution issues.
It is often stated that newspapers have a great influence in our opinions and ideas. Does this influence have more positive or negative outcome?
A person's worth nowadays seems to be judged according to social status and material possessions. Old-fashioned values, such as honour, kindness and trust, no longer seem important.
International marketing is sometimes seen as invasive and an intrusion into the country in question. Others argue that it is a necessary and economical form of education in addition to spreading ideas, language and culture.
With the advancement of technology many traditional skills are no longer required. It is natural that traditional way of living is pointless in this modern era as technology is replacing the old way of life. Hence it is pointless to keep those traditional skills alive.   
With the recent development in technology like e-books some people feel that the printed media like books, newspapers and magazine will soon be a thing of the past. Others feel that those forms of media will never disappear.
Technology has made our life easier and we lead a better life because of the advancement of technology. On the other side, many people think that technology has made our life too complex and we were better before the latest technology has changed our lifestyle.
More houses are needed in many countries to cope with increasing populations. Would it be better to build houses in existing towns and cities, or to develop new towns in rural areas?
Many people say that film stars, musicians and sports stars are highly paid whereas professionals of other important sectors are comparatively less paid.
With the rise in popularity of the internet, newspapers will soon become a thing of the past.
Many people opine that a sense of competition in children helps them do better in life. Others refute this point of view and say that children should be co-operative to learn more and to become better persons in the future.
Children today play very violent games. This must be the reason for the increase in violence and crime in most major cities of the world.
Countries should start using nuclear power as their main source of energy; fossil fuels (i.e. coal, oil and gas) are not going to last forever and nuclear power is the cheapest alternative.
Children nowadays watch TV programmes more than ever before. Is watching television good or bad for children?
An increasing number of students are now going to English-Speaking countries to learn the language. To what extent do you agree that studying in a country where English is the first language is the best way to learn the ‘International Language – English’?
Some organizations impose the rule of wearing a uniform in the workplace. Do you think that employees in certain organizations should wear a uniform? What is your viewpoint on this issue?
Some people think that schools should select students according to their academic abilities, while others believe that it is better to have students with different abilities studying together.
Rapid technological change has shaped the world we live in today. Far from having a positive influence, living in the high-tech world dependent on computers and mobile devices has distracted us from what is really important in life.
Many people prefer to use public transportation while others say that personal cars are the best mode of transportation. Excessive use of private cars is considered to be the main reason for the traffic jam in many cities and that's why the use of public transportation is encouraged.
Visitors who visit other countries should follow the local customs and behaviours or the host country should welcome the cultural diversity and allow visitors’ own custom and behaviours. 
Most of the poor in the world live in countries where tourism is a growing industry. The issue that tourism does not benefit the poorest is a concerning one. How can the income generated by tourism benefit the poor? And how can we ensure that tourism does not destroy traditional cultures and ways of life?
Many countries are still facing problems regarding a huge population. To control the ever increasing population many people believe that Government can control the population through taxes.
Many employees are now required to wear a uniform as part of their company policy and this has many significant advantages. What is your viewpoint on this issue? Do the advantages of it outweigh the disadvantages?
Some people think that environmental problems are too big for individuals to solve, while others think that the government cannot solve these environmental problems unless individuals make some action.
Newspapers have an enormous influence on people’s opinions and ideas. Do you think it is a positive or negative situation?
Report research suggests that majority of criminals who were sent to prison would commit crimes when they are set free. What do you think of this case? What to be done to solve this problem?
Some people think parents should read or tell stories to children, while others think parents need not do that, as children can read books, watch TV or movies by themselves.
Some people believe that women should play an equal role as men in a country’s police force or military force, such as the army, while others think women are not suitable for these kinds of jobs.
Because of the global economy, many goods including what we use as daily basic produced by other countries have to be transported for a long distance.
Rich countries should not employ skilled labour from poor countries, as poor countries need the workers more.
An increase in production of consumer goods results in damage to the natural environment. What are the causes and possible solutions?
Some people think that children should obey rules or do what their parents and teachers want them to do, but others think that children controlled too much cannot deal with problems well by themselves.
Poor students or students who come from rural areas often find it is difficult to get access to the university education, so some people think universities should make it easier for them to study at.
Some people support the development of agriculture, like factory farming and the scientific creation of fruits and vegetables, while others oppose.
Some people think the cheap air flight gives ordinary people more freedom. However, others think the cheap air flight should be banned because it pollutes the air and brings many other problems.
Directors and managers of organisations are often older people. Some people say that it is better for younger people to be leaders.
Some people think that the government should spend money on road systems, while others think car owners who use those roads should pay.
Some people believe when famous people support international aid, it makes the general public think about it. Others think celebrities make the problem less important.
It is often cited that “Not everything that is learned is contained in books”. According to many, we learn most of the things from our own experience while others believe that books are our main source of knowledge. Compare and contrast knowledge gained from experience with knowledge gained from books. In your opinion, which source is more important? Why?  
‘Presentation is better than cure’ and that’s why more money from health budget should be spent on promoting a healthy lifestyle to prevent illness. Therefore it is wise to spend more money to prevent illness than to spend on curing people who are already ill. 
Children in many countries are getting involved in paid jobs. Some people think that it is a positive trend as those children are gaining valuable work experience and are becoming responsible from an early state of their lives. Others, however, show their concern and argue that this is completely wrong.
Some people prefer to travel around town by car, while others prefer public transport such as bus, trains, subway.
Children in many countries are eating more fast food and convenience snacks. Why are children doing this and how serious are the consequences?
Nowadays more people choose to move out from the area where they grew up, in a search for a better job.
Some people feel that certain workers like nurses, doctors and teachers are undervalued and should be paid more, especially when other people like film actors or company bosses are paid huge sums of money that are out of proportion to the importance of the work that they do.
According to some people, we have become more independent in the modern world while others oppose this view and say that we have become more dependent on each other.
Some people think one should stay all their life in the same job, whereas others advocate changing jobs from time to time.
Some educationalists think that a programme of international exchange visits will offer various benefits for teenage school students.
Some people say that air travel is one of the main reasons for increased environmental pollution. Should we reduce the number of tourist flights in order to reduce pollution?
Almost every successful company is using advertisements to increase their sales. What features make an advertisement effective? Is advertising good or bad for the society?
Renowned and successful sports professionals earn a lot more than people in other important professions. While many people think that it is unfair, a large group of people say that this is totally justified.
Globalization has many positive effects on world’s economy but the negative effects of it cannot be forgotten.
Some people think that the best way to reduce crime is to give longer prison sentences. Others, however, believe there are better alternative ways of reducing crime.
"Tomorrow is the most important thing in our life." However, some people think that the present time is more important. How important is it for individuals and the country to think and do something for the future? What is your own opinion?
Some companies reward employees for exceptional work by giving them extra money. Is this a good way of encouraging employees to work hard?
Developed countries often give financial aid to developing countries, but it does not solve poverty so developed countries should give other types of help to the poor countries rather than financial aid.
Many children these days have an unhealthy lifestyle. Both schools and parents are equally responsible for solving this problem.
In Britain, when someone gets old they often go to live in a home with other old people where there are nurses to look after them. Sometimes the government has to pay for this care.
Some people think older employees are more useful to a company while some people believe younger employees are more useful in modern society.
Games are as important for adults as they are for children.
Salary is the major factor considered while choosing the job. Do you agree or disagree?
Traditionally women play the role of upbringing their children while men work outside to earn money for the family. Some people argue that women make the better parent than man and that’s why they should play the greater role in upbringing children. Others, however, say that men can be as good as women in parenting.
Creative artists like painter and musicians should be financially supported by the government. However, some people disagree with this and say that those artists should support their own financing or should be funded by alternative sources.
In some countries, an increasing number of people are suffering from health problems as a result of eating too much fast food. It is, therefore, necessary for governments to impose a higher tax on this kind of food.
Poor countries should become rich first and reduce CO2 emissions later. Or should they start to deal with it right now?
Maintaining safety standard while building homes is very important and some people believe that government should be responsible for enforcing the strict building codes while many others opine that house owners and the people who are working there should be responsible for that. In your opinion who should be responsible for enforcing strict building codes.
Most people agree that money cannot bring happiness. Why is happiness difficult to define? How can people achieve happiness?
Some people think that it is necessary to travel to other places to learn about other cultures. Others say that books, films and the Internet can be used as a source of information about different cultures.
Average life span of the human in many developing countries is increasing. Is this is a positive or negative development? Will this increased life expectancy have any social and personal issue? Suggest some measures that could be taken to reduce the impact of ageing populations.
We are living in a throwaway society. What are the reasons for the creation of ‘throwaway societies’ and what future impacts can it have?
Capital punishment is essential to control violence and crime in society. Without enforcing capital punishment like dead sentence our life would become less secure and the number of crime and violence in society would increase.
Some people think that dangerous sports should be banned, while others disagree. Do you agree or disagree?
Some teachers prefer the group study methods for their students while others prefer the individual learning method. Which one do you prefer? Discuss the benefits of group study and individual learning.
Some people think distance-learning programmes can never be as good as courses taken in person.
Childhood obesity is becoming a serious problem in many countries. Explain the main causes and effects of this problem, and suggest some possible solutions.
Car ownership has increased so rapidly over the past thirty years that many cities in the world are now ‘one big traffic jam.’
If we look back at history it is seen that violence and conflict were evident under male leadership than female leadership. Does this suggest that female leadership is a better option? Would it ensure the peace and better growth in the society?
Some people believe that robots will play an important role in future societies, while others argue that robots might have negative effects on society.
More women nowadays work outside and spend a little time with family and kids. Their positions in society have changed and because of that young people face many problems including juvenile delinquency and frustration.
Most of the high-level positions in government and private organisations are owned by men and very few women are in the high-level jobs. Should government reserve a certain portion of high-level jobs for women?
Computers are being used in almost all sectors and we are becoming more dependent on this machine. What are the possible future usages of computers and what are the benefits and drawbacks of the extensive usages of computers in our life?
Many people prefer to live in a city while others say that living in a rural area has more advantages. Compare the advantages and disadvantages of living in the city to living in the countryside.
People have different hobbies ranging from reading books to mountain hiking. According to some, hobbies must be difficult to be enjoyable while other oppose the idea.
Some people like to spend free time with the friends of the same age. Others like to spend free time with people of different ages. Discuss both views and state your opinion.
In many countries today there are many highly qualified graduates without employment. What factors, may have caused this situation and what, in your opinion, should be done about it?
People should work a fixed number of hours per week and employers should not ask anybody to work extra hours.
Nowadays, many people believe that it is important to be good at social interaction in order to get ahead at work. How far do you think social skills matter at the workplace?
Single young people in many countries leave their parents for study and job and live somewhere else. Does this trend have more advantages than disadvantages?
Some people say that rich nations should help poor countries with their basic needs like food and education while others oppose the idea and argue that the poor nation themselves should try to improve their condition. Do you agree with the idea that rich and developed nations should help the poor nations?
Overpopulation in many major urban centres around the world is a major problem. What are the causes of this? How can this problem be solved?
In many countries, children are engaged in different kinds of paid work. Some people regard this as completely wrong, while others consider it a valuable work experience, important for learning and taking responsibility. What is your opinion?
The scientist believes that computers will become more intelligent than human beings. Some people find it is positive while others think it is a negative development. Discuss both points and give your own opinion.
Many people work for money while others say that there are more important aspects of job satisfaction. While choosing a job money is the most significant consideration.
Many people nowadays change career more frequently than ever before while others stick to a single job. What are the advantages and disadvantages of changing career? 
With technology speeding up, more and more young people begin to use mobile phones and the Internet, but old people have little chance to be exposed to them. What ways could mobile phone and the Internet be useful to old people? How can old people be encouraged to use this new technology? 
Some people think it is more important to spend public money on promoting a healthy lifestyle in order to prevent illness than to spend it on the treatment for people who are already ill. To what extent do you agree or disagree? 
Nowadays, people always throw the old things away when they buy new things, some people claim that the broken things should be repaired and used again. What factors cause this phenomenon? What effects the phenomenon leads to?
Nowadays more and more young people hold the important positions in the government. Some people think that it is a good thing,while others argue that it is not suitable.
Studies suggest that children spend more time watching TV than they did in the past and spend less on doing active or creative things. Why do you think it is the case? What measures and methods can be used to tackle with it?
Advances in technology and automation have reduced the need for manual labour. Therefore working hours should be reduced.
Some people think the main benefit of international cooperation is in the protection of the environment, while others think that the main benefit is in the world business. Discuss both views and give your opinion.
Some children can learn efficiently by watching TV. Therefore, they should be encouraged to watch TV both at home and at school. To what extent do you agree or disagree?
Some countries have an ever-increasing proportion of the population who are aged 15 or younger. What do you think are the current and future effects of this trend for those countries?
Old generations often hold some traditional ideas on the correct way of life, thinking and behaviour. However, some people think that it is not helpful for the young generations to prepare for modern life in the future. What’s your opinion? 
Nowadays, we are living in a throw-away society. What are its causes and what are its problems? What could be done to address this issue?
Today’s children are living under more pressure from the society than children in the past. To what extent do you agree or disagree with this opinion?
Some people think that we should invent a new language for international communication. Do the benefits of this outweigh the problems?
The government should pay for the course fees for everyone who wants to study at the university.
The natural resources such as oil, forests and fresh water are being consumed at an alarming rate. What problems does it cause? How can we solve these problems?
Some people claim that public museums and art galleries will not be needed because people can see historical objects and works of art by using a computer.
Many developing countries are currently expanding their tourist industries. Why is this the case? Is it a positive development?
Team activities can teach more skills for life than those activities which are played alone. 
Computers are increasingly used in education. In which areas do you think are computers more important and in which areas are teachers more important? 
Some people think that the government should ensure the healthy lifestyle of people, but others argue that it should be decided by individuals.
Individuals should not be allowed to carry guns as it increases the crime and violence in the society.
Some people think that politicians have the greatest influence on the world. Other people, however, believe that scientists have the greatest influence.
Many countries spend a lot of money in art. Some people think investment in art is necessary, but others say money is better spent on improving health and education.
In many countries, traditional foods are being replaced by international fast foods. This is having a negative effect on both families and societies.
Multi-cultural societies, in which there is a mixture of different ethnic peoples, bring more benefits than drawbacks to a country.
Some people think that personal happiness is directly related to economic success. Others argue that happiness depends on different factors.
Some people think that good health is a basic human need, so the medical service should not be run by profit-making companies. Do you think the disadvantages of the private health care outweigh the advantages?
In order to learn a language well, we should also learn about the country as well as the cultures and lifestyles of the people who speak this language.
It is more important for a building to serve a purpose than to look beautiful. Architects shouldn’t worry about producing building as a work of art.  
The best way to solve the world’s environmental problem is to increase the price of fuel.  
International tourism has become a huge industry in the world. Do the problems of international travel outweigh its advantages?
Far too little has been done to prevent animals and plants from dying out, although people have been aware of this problem for a long time. Why do people do so little about it?
Some people think that teachers should be responsible for teaching students to judge what is right and wrong so that they can behave well. Others say that teachers should only teach students academic subjects. 
As global trade increases between different countries, many daily necessities are produced in other countries. Such goods are usually transported a long distance.
Some people think the increasing business and cultural contact between countries brings many positive effects. Others say it causes the loss of national identities.
In many countries, good schools and medical facilities are available only in cities. Some people think new teachers and doctors should work in rural areas for a few years, but others think everyone should be free to choose where they work.
Modern lifestyle is completely different from the way people lived in the past. Some people think that the changes have been very positive while some others believe they have negative.
People have easy access to video games nowadays and many people consider playing video games as a form of entertainment or even educational. Others however completely deny this and say that video games only have negative effects on people.
Some people believe that competition helps children to be better prepared for their future, while others say that competition can be harmful to children and should be limited to adults.
According to some, we learn most of our lessons from our parents and hence they are our best teachers in life. While others argue that the teachers we meet in our schools and colleges teach us more important things.
Though women mostly take care of their children in most of the societies, men can also be as good as women in upbringing children. The parenting responsibilities should be equally divided and both father and mother should take care of their children.
People can prepare various types of foods easily and in less time nowadays. What contributed to this improvement and has this development changed the way we live?
There are various reasons for attending colleges and universities and getting a job is definitely one of them. However, many other reasons drive us to enrol in a college or university.
In today’s world, many people use mobile phones and the internet to communication with others. This has resulted in the use of new words and different forms of spelling and grammar. Why do you think these changes have happened? Are they positive or negative development?
Many people prefer to live in small towns while others prefer to live in big cities. What are the advantages and disadvantages of living in a small town and in a big city? Where would you prefer to live?
Nowadays many people follow fashion trends and think that it is very important. Is it a good or a bad development?
Government investment in the arts, such as music and theatre, is a waste of money. The government must invest this money in public services instead.
In recent years terrorism in Pakistan has increased. What are the possible causes and solutions to this?
These days, people work in more than one job and often change career several times during their life.
Nearly every new building is designed by an architect nowadays. Some people believe that is important for a building.
These days more fathers stay at home and take care of their children while mothers go out to work. What could be the reasons for this? Is it a positive or negative development?
Nowadays more people are living by themselves. What are the reasons for this? Will this have a negative or a positive impact on the society?
Life is now better that it was 100 years ago.
Nowadays many people prefer to study or live in foreign countries. While studying and living abroad brings many benefits to individuals, it also has a number of disadvantages. What are the advantages and disadvantages of leaving your country to live or study abroad?
Nowadays traffic jams are becoming a big problem in most cities and bigger towns. Some people suggest that widening of roads is a solution to this problem. Do you agree or disagree?
The society would benefit from a ban on all forms of advertising because it serves no useful purpose, and can even be damaging.
Some think that exercise is the key to health while others feel that having a balanced diet is more important.
Most of the countries provide free health service. Some people believe that people with unhealthy habits like smoking, stress and not exercising should not get this free service.
School children are becoming far too dependent on computers. This is having an alarming effect on reading and writing skills. Teachers need to avoid using computers in the classroom at all costs and go back to teaching basic study skills.
The proliferation of private cars on the roads in many parts of the world has led to serious problems of pollution and may contribute to global warming. Some people think that governments should spend money for development of public transportation systems in order to help alleviate this problem. Others think it is better to spend money for the development of electric and other types of cars that may cause less pollution.
Some people are becoming more interested in family history research. Others argue we should focus on the present and future generation.
Some people are reducing their walks, however, many health experts say that walking is the best exercise to maintain health. Why do people walk less? What might encourage people to walk longer distances?
Some people say that talent is the most important factor for being an expert in a field while others say that motivation is the key to that.   If you want to become an expert in a certain field, do you need to have more talent or more motivation?
In today’s competitive world, many families find it necessary for both parents go out to work. While some say the children in these families benefit from the additional income, others feel they lack support because of their parents’ absence.
Some people believe that exams are an inappropriate way of measuring students’ performance and should be replaced by continuous assessment.
Because of the busy pace of modern life, many children spend most of their time indoors and have little exposure to the natural world.
While many people opine that drug smugglers should be punished by death row, others completely oppose this idea and argue that a less severe punishment should be in action. Recently, Australia urged Indonesia not to execute drug smugglers on death row.
Australia urges Indonesia not to execute drug smugglers on death row.
Nowadays many scientists and tourists would like to travel to remote natural environments, such as the South Pole.
Some people think that they can make as much noise as they want, while others think that the amount of noise people make should be strictly controlled.
Some people think that having a set retirement age (e.g. 65 years) for everybody, regardless of occupation, is unfair. They believe that certain workers deserve to retire and receive a pension at an earlier age.
Some say that music is as important as other subjects in schools, especially at the preschool level.
Different people have different approaches to life. Some prefer daily routines while others enjoy having new experiences. Which category do you fall into and why? 
Discuss when, if ever capital punishment can be viewed as a valid punishment for a crime. 
Disruptive school students have a negative influence on others. Students who are noisy and disobedient should be grouped together and taught separately. 
Watching TV is bad for children. 
Some people believe that money is the most important factor for achieving happiness. However, others believe that happiness has nothing to do with money. 
Due to Science and Technology, people all over the world are having the same lifestyles. Do you think it is a positive or negative development?
Some people think that mobile phones should be banned in public places like libraries, shop and on public transport.
People in the past used to be more dependent on one another, whereas nowadays they lead a more independent life.
Some people think that the teenage years are the happiest time of most people's lives. Others think that adult life brings more happiness, in spite of greater responsibilities.
Some schools agree that fast-food restaurants and supermarkets can promote their products in school and that schools benefit from it.
In Britain, when someone gets old they often go to live in a home with other old people where there are nurses to look after them. Sometimes the government has to pay for this care.
An increase in the recycling material such as paper, cans and plastic has been noticed worldwide. Why do you think is this happening? What can be done to encourage recycling among people?
Nowadays, the designs of the buildings in the community are affected by other cultures. This results in loss of cultural identity of the structures in the community. People would claim that buildings should be built using a traditional style for the protection of cultural identity.
Global warming is one of the most serious issues that the world is facing today. What are the causes of global warming and what measures can governments and individuals take to tackle the issue?
Modern high technology is transforming how we work and is of benefit to all society.
Examine the arguments in favour of and against animal experiments, and come to a conclusion on this issue.
The proliferation of private cars on the roads in many parts of the world has led to serious problems of pollution and may contribute to global warming. Some people think that governments should spend money for the development of public transportation systems in order to help alleviate this problem. Others think it is better to spend money for the development of electric and other types of cars that may cause less pollution.
Nowadays it is easy to apply for and be given a credit card. However, some people experience problems when they are not able to pay their debts back.
Employers nowadays put more emphasis on social skills. Some people believe that social skills are important in addition to good qualifications for job success.
In many cities, the use of video cameras in public places is being increased in order to reduce crime, but some people believe that these measures restrict our individual freedom.
More and more qualified people are moving from poor to rich countries to fill vacancies in specialist areas like engineering, computing and medicine. Some people believe that by encouraging the movement of such people, rich countries are stealing from poor countries. Others feel that this is only part of the natural movement of workers around the world.
In the last century, the first man to walk on the moon said it was "a giant leap for mankind”. However, some people think it has made little difference to our daily lives.
Many old buildings protected by law are part of a nation’s history. Some people think they should be knocked down and replaced by news ones. How important is it to maintain old buildings? Should history stand in the way of progress?
Many people prefer to work in the public sector, rather than in the private sector.  What are the reasons for this, and what effects does it have on a country?
Universities should accept equal numbers of male and female students in every subject.
In many countries schools have severe problems with student behavior.
What do you think are the causes of this?
What solutions can you suggest?
Some people prefer to spend their lives doing the same things and avoiding change. Others, however, think that change is always a good thing.
Some people believe that visitors to other countries should follow local customs and behaviour. Others disagree and think that the host country should welcome cultural differences.
Some people think that it is better to educate boys and girls in separate schools. Others, however, believe that boys and girls benefit more from attending mixed schools.
Today more people are travelling than ever before. Why is this the case? What are the benefits of travelling for the traveller?
In some countries, the average weight of people is increasing and their level of health and fitness is decreasing.
Popular events like the football world cup and other international sporting occasions are essential in easing international tensions and releasing patriotic emotions in a safe way.
Every year several languages die out. Some people think that this is not important because life will be easier if there are fewer languages in the world.
Some people believe that studying at university or college is the best route to a successful career, while others believe that it is better to get a job straight after school.
Smokers can cause themselves serious health problems. The choice to smoke is made freely and with knowledge of dangers. Smokers should, therefore, expect to pay more for medical treatment than non-smokers.
Many people say that the only way to guarantee a good job is to complete a course of university education. Others claim that it is better to start work after school and gain experience in the world of work.
Being a celebrity - such as famous film star or sports personality - brings problems as well as benefits. Do you think that being a celebrity brings more benefits or more problems?
With the rise in popularity of the internet, newspapers will soon become a thing of the past.
Some people think that government should spend money on health awareness while others argue it is better to spend build hospitals rather than health awareness.
Do you believe that experimentation on animals for scientific purposes is justified? Are there any alternatives to animal experimentation?
Some people help their community as an individually while others help through organisation. Discuss both views and give your opinion.
The use of cell phones (mobile phones) has increased rapidly in the twenty-first century. Additionally, cell phones can now be used for many purposes besides making phone calls.
Parents, who send their children to private school, should not be required to pay education tax.
Women can do everything that men can, and they even do it better. They also can do many things that men cannot. But there is a fact that their work is not appreciated as men's although they have to sacrifice a lot for their family and career.
Education is the single most important factor in the development of a country.
Many governments in the world spend large amounts of money on art which helps to develop quality in people's lives. However, governments should spend money on other things rather than art.
In recent years, more and more people are choosing to read e-books rather than paper books.
Air traffic is increasingly leading to more noise, pollution, and airport construction. One reason for this is the growth in low-cost passenger flights, often to holiday destinations. Some people say that government should try to reduce air traffic by taxing it more heavily.
Many people are using credit cards or loans to run up huge personal debts that they may be unable to repay. It should, therefore, be made more difficult for individuals to borrow large amounts of money.
Formal examinations are the only effective way to assess a student's performance. Continual assessment such as course work and projects is not a satisfactory way to do this.
It is often believed that decisions taken quickly are wrong decisions. Are quick decisions always wrong?
Some people believe that international sporting events are the ideal opportunity to show the world the qualities of the hosting nation. Others believe that these events are mainly a large unjustifiable expense.
It is inevitable that as technology develops so traditional cultures must be lost. Technology and tradition are incompatible - you cannot have both together.
In the last 20 years, there have been significant developments in the field of information technology (IT), for example, the World Wide Web and communication by email. However, these developments in IT are likely to have more negative effects than positive in the future.
Increasingly, the western world has been outsourcing its labour-related jobs to cheaper alternatives available in less-developed countries. Although this creates opportunities for people in poorer nations, it is a policy that is criticized by many in the west.
Test and examination is a central feature of school systems in any counties. Do you think the educational benefits of testing outweigh any disadvantages?
How important is the dress code in our lives? Do you consider that dressing appropriately is important or are you of the opinion that everyone should be able to wear exactly what they like?
Some argue younger people are not suitable for important positions in the government, while others think this is a good idea.
Problems with environmental pollution have become so serious that many countries are trying to solve these problems.
Top level authorities of a company should always take employees’ suggestions or ideas to take any decisions.
Over population of urban areas has led to numerous problems. Identify one or two serious ones and suggest ways that governments and individuals can tackle these problems.
Some people say that the best way to improve public health is by increasing the number of sports facilities. Others, however, say that this would have little effect on public health and that other measures are required.
What is the best invention of last 100 years; the computer, antibiotics, airplane, and explain why? 
Public libraries should provide books and not waste their limited resources on expensive high-tech media such as software, videos or DVDs. 
Do you think consumers should avoid over packed products or it is the responsibility of product producers to avoid extra packaging of products?
In today's world of advanced science and technology, we still greatly value our artists such as musicians, painters and writers. What can arts tell us about life that science and technology cannot?
Some people say that the Internet is making the world smaller by bringing people together. To what extent do you agree that the internet is making it easier for people to communicate with one another?
Nowadays TV has become an essential part of life. Medium to spread news & awareness and for some, it acts like a companion.

What is your opinion about this?
What are the possible effects of living long on an individual and on the whole society? Give some examples for and against according to your knowledge.
Recent figures show an increase in violent crime among youngsters under the age of 18. Some psychologists claim that the basic reason for this is that children these days are not getting the social and emotional learning they need from parents and teachers.
Some people think that modern technology has more negative effects on our lives than positive ones.
Machine translation (MT) is slower and less accurate than human translation and there is no immediate or predictable likelihood of machines taking over this role from humans.
It is quite common for both parents in a family to work. Sometimes this is because they need two salaries to survive whereas other times it is their choice.
It is better for boys and girls to study separately rather than study in mixed-sex classes. They are less distracted and this leads to better results.
Increasing the price of petrol is the best way to solve the growing traffic and pollution problems.
Some people believe that school children should learn some practical skills like car maintenance, opening a bank account or learning about other traditional skills.
Some people think the teacher has greater influence than parents in the development of child 's intelligence and social skills.
Some people view giving presents as an important way to show care to family and friends, others think there are more important things that can be done to show care and appreciation.
Some people say that People give more emphasize on outlook and spend more time on that than the past. What is your opinion on that? How has this trend changed over the decade?
Some people prefer to watch serious movies while others say entertainment is the main purpose of a movie.  In your opinion what factors contribute to a good movie?
Exposure to international media such as films, TV and magazines has a significant impact on local cultures. What do you think has been the impact?
Most countries want to improve the standard of living through economic development, however, others think the social value is lost as a result. Do you think the advantages of economic development outweigh the disadvantages?
Some people think it is not necessary for adults to receive education in class. Self-study is a good way for them to study more effectively.
Pollution and other environmental problems are resulting from a country's developing and becoming richer. Some think this cannot be avoided.
Competitiveness is a positive quality for people in most societies. How does competitiveness affect individuals? Is it a positive or negative trend? 
The government should control the amount of violence in films and on television in order to decrease the violent crimes in society.
The only way to improve the safety on our own road is to have stricter punishment for driving offenders.
Sending criminals to prison is not the best method of dealing with them. Education and job training are better ways to help them.
People can perform everyday tasks, such as shopping and banking as well as business transactions, without meeting other people face-to-face. What are the effects of this on individual and society as a whole?
Many students have to study subjects which they do not like. Some people think this is a complete waste of time. Do you agree or disagree with this statement?
Nowadays for many people, the internet is replacing regular books. What do you think will happen in the future and what is your opinion about this trend?
Some people believe that latest computers and technologies are more convenient that previous ones while others oppose this idea.
Parents and teachers make many rules for children to encourage good behaviour and protect them from danger. However, children would benefit from fewer rules and greater freedom.
Some people think that it is better to educate boys and girls in separate schools. Others, however, believe that boys and girls benefit more from attending mixed school.
Some people think that the teenage ages are the happiest times of most people’s lives. Others think that adult life brings more happiness, in spite of greater responsibilities.
Development in technology causes environmental problems. Some people believe the solution to these problems is everyone accepts a simpler way of life, while others say that technology can solve these problems. Discuss both views and give your own opinion.
Crime is a problem all over the world and there is nothing that can be done to prevent it.
Individual greed and selfishness have been the basis of the modern society. Some people think that we must return to the older and more traditional values of respect for the family and the local community in order to create a better world to live in.
In many cities, planners tend to arrange shops, schools, offices, and homes in specific areas and separate them from each other. Do you think the advantages of this policy outweigh the disadvantages?
Tourism is an excellent way to develop a country, but it can also cause harm. How can countries ensure that tourism benefits the development?
Some people believe the range of technology available to individuals today is increasing the gap between poor people and rich people. Others think it is having an opposite effect. Discuss both of these points of view. What is your opinion on that issue?
Some people think if students are afraid of the teacher it is better. Others say that having a friendly relationship between the teachers and students is better. What do you think? Which one do you support?
Young people these days tend to be less polite and respectful than in the past. What do you think are the reasons for that? What can be done to solve this issue?
Some people believe that tourists should accept social and environmental responsibility while others believe that tourists should not accept any responsibility at all.
Some languages die every year and English is becoming used more and more as a world language. Many people feel this is a positive trend and that the world with fewer languages promotes harmony and understanding between people. Analyse both sides of this argument and provide your opinion.
Some people argue that the purpose of zoos is only to entertain people. What do you think? What are the other purposes of zoos?
Advertising encourages consumers to buy in quantity rather than in quality.
Some people think that regular study is the key to the academic success of a student while others opine that a good study environment is the most important factor for students’ academic success. What are factors which are related to student’s academic success in universities?
Some people feel that entertainers (e.g. film stars, pop musicians or sports stars) are paid too much money.
Mobile phones and the internet are very useful. However, it is rare for old people to use them. What ways could mobile phones and the internet be useful to old people? How do the old people to be encouraged using this new technology?
More and more people today are using computers and electronic devices to access information. Therefore there is no longer any need to print books, magazines or newspapers.
Some people believe that children are given too much free time. They feel that this time should be used to do more school work. To what extent do you agree to that?
Junk food is quite harmful to our generation and we need an educated generation to stop it. Is education the answer to stop people from eating junk food?
In many countries, airplane tickets prices have dropped. Is this a positive or negative development?
Some young people are deliberately damaging the public places. Write an essay by addressing what are the causes of it, how they are damaging and what can be done in order to stop it.
Some people think that changes in their lives are essential, while others, however, are uncomfortable with change, and prefer to continue living in the same place or working in the same job, etc.
Nowadays information can be accessed on electronic devices so print media like magazine and newspapers are not important and people should use electronic devices to get information.
Many people believe students would benefit from spending some time away from studying between secondary school (high school) and university.
Are famous people treated unfairly by the media? Should they be given more privacy, or is the price of their fame an invasion into their private lives? Give your opinion about this issue?
In many countries, students take a year gap after finishing school and work or travel during this period. Should students take a gap year before attending universities? What are the advantages and disadvantages of it?
The noise levels have impacted the quality of our life, what are the causes of this problem and what should be done to solve it.
It is sometimes said that people should be encouraged to get married before they are 30, as this is the best for the individual and for society.
Some people work for the same organisation all their working life. Others think it is better to work for different organisations. 
Some people think that economic progress is the only way to measure a country’s success, while others think that there are other factors which can be used to measure a country’s success. What are these factors? And among them, which one is more important than others?
As we are facing more and more problems which affect the whole planet, good relationships between different countries are becoming more important than ever before.
Earlier technological developments brought more benefits and changed the lives of ordinary people more than recent technological developments.
Some sports are extremely dangerous but many people still like them very much. Why do people take part in dangerous sports? Give some suggestions on how to deal with these dangers.
In some countries in Europe, some children from the age of 11 or 13 go to schools to learn more practical skills that will help them get a job. Other children stay in schools which provide a more general academic education.
Some say that young and energetic employees are the most valuable for the company, others argue that older employees have more experience and knowledge.
In many societies, elderly people often live in retirement homes. This is not appropriate because families should always care for their ageing members.
For many people shopping unwanted things is just a form of entertainment.
The gap between the rich and the poor is becoming wider; the rich are becoming richer, and the poor are getting even poorer. What problems can the situation cause? What can be done to reduce this gap?
Some people think foreign visitors should be charged more than local people when they visit the cultural and historical attractions in a country.
Nowadays people live in the society where consumer goods are cheaper to buy. Do you think its advantages outweigh disadvantages?
The government should encourage industries and business to move out of big cities and into regional areas.
Once children start school, teachers have more influence on their intellectual and social development than parents.
An increasing number of people choose to live in big cities. What problems will this bring about? Should the government encourage people to live in small towns? 
The housing shortage in big cities can cause severe social consequences. Some people think only government action can solve this problem. 
Many people believe that scientific research should be carried out and controlled by the governments rather than private companies.
Many people say that we have developed into a “throw-away” culture because we are filling up our environment with so many plastic bags and rubbish that we cannot fully dispose of.
Food can be produced much more cheaply today because of improved fertilizers and better machinery. However, some of the methods used to do this may be dangerous to human health and may have negative effects on local communities. 
For some people, shopping is not just about buying what is necessary, but a form of entertainment. Do you think it is a positive or a negative development?
Some countries have introduced a law to limit working hours for employees. Why is this law introduced? Do you think it is a positive or a negative development? 
People find it very difficult to speak in public or to give a presentation before an audience. Do you think public speaking skill is really important? Should students be taught public speaking at school? 
Society is based on rules and laws. If individuals were free to do whatever they want to do, it could not function. 
Some people think that competitive sports have a positive effect on the child’s education while others argue it is not so.
In companies, promotions to high positions should be given to employees inside the company and not to somebody outside the company or new hiring.
Many old cities around the world are going through a major process of modernization. What are the advantages and disadvantages of modernization?
Some people think that paying taxes is enough to contribute to the society. Others argue that being a citizen involves more responsibilities.
Some languages are increasingly spoken in different countries, while the usage of others is rapidly declining. Is this a positive or a negative development?
History tells that people have often thought about creating an ideal society, but most of the times fail in making this happen.
Some people think that charity organizations should only offer help to people of their own country. But others believe that these organizations should give aid to people in great need wherever they live.
Tobacco is a kind of drug. People have been free to use it. Some people think that it should be illegal to use it compared with other drugs.
Some people say that parents have the most important role in a child’s development. However, others argue that other things like television or friends have the most significant influence.
We no longer need to have animals kept in zoos, so zoos should be closed.
Some people think that job satisfaction is more important than job security while some people think that they cannot always expect job satisfaction, a permanent job is more important.
We need good teachers to educate the new generation and teachers play great roles to a country. But for that, we need ideal teachers. How can we make an Ideal Teacher?
The importance of biodiversity is being more widely recognised as increasing numbers of species come under threat.
Some people think that only staff who worked in a company for a long time should be promoted to a higher position.
Do you believe that societies ought to enforce capital punishment or are there alternative forms of punishment that would be better used?
Modern communication systems benefit many people yet there are some that oppose to them.
Today, the majority of children are raised by their grandparents due to the fact that their parents are busy working. To what extent do you think it affects the whole family?
In some large cities, people have to pay a fee when they drive their cars into the city centre, in a policy to reduce the number of cars in the city.
In some countries, many people do not have enough money to access the Internet. Should governments be responsible for ensuring that everyone can get access to the Internet?
Why do you think teachers give homework to students? How important is it for students to have homework? Are there any other ways of revising school lessons? Perhaps homework should be abolished. Give your opinion about this.
Mobile phones and the Internet have made it easier to stay in contact with other people. However, as a lot of time is spent using telephones and computers, there is less face-to-face contact and direct communication. Is the growing use of communications technology a positive or a negative development for society?
Many people believe that education standards have declined in recent times, particularly in the areas of literacy and numeracy.
The amount of sport shown on television every week has increased significantly and this is having an impact on live sports events. Do you think the benefits of having more televised sport are greater than the disadvantages?
Many students decide to further their study abroad. What are the benefits and drawbacks of studying abroad?
The government should make more efforts to promote alternative sources of energy.
The birth rate in most developed countries is predicted to fall over the next 50 years. By 2030 it is estimated that over one-third of the population in most developed countries will be aged 65 and over. What effects will the predictions have in developed countries if they prove true? What can be done now to deal with this situation?
While studying some students take weekend or evening jobs to help with expenditure. How do you feel about this? What are the drawbacks and benefits of such a decision?
Modern children are suffering from the diseases that were once considered to be meant for adults only. Obesity is a major disease prevalent among children. What are its causes and what solutions can be offered?
Even though globalization affects the world's economies in a very positive way, its negative side should not be forgotten.
Should wealthy nations be required to share their wealth and resources among poorer nations by providing such things as food and education? Or is it the responsibility of the governments of poorer nations to look after their citizen themselves?
Many of the diseases which afflict people who do office jobs are the direct result of a sedentary lifestyle.
Some companies say that if an employee wants to smoke they must leave the building and smoke outside. This takes time away from work, and the employers insist that this time should be counted as break time. This may not be fair to the smokers who may have to wait a long time to get out of the building. How could this problem be resolved?
Many businesses find it very difficult to assign enough time and resources to research and development. What could a government do to encourage more company spending in this area?
Some people say domestic animals, like cats, should not be reared in cities. Others say that such companion animals are beneficial to the community of a city. Which attitude do you believe to be correct?
Is it better to rear children in a joint family or in a nuclear family? Which do you think has greater positive impact on the child’s future?
In the bygone days, many had skills such as making their own clothes and doing repairs to things in the house. In many countries, nowadays, skills like these are disappearing. Why do you think this is happening? How far is this situation true in your country?
Originality does not mean thinking something that was never thought before: it means putting old ideas together in new ways.
People in all modern societies use drugs, but today’s youth are experimenting with both legal and illegal drugs, and at an early age. Some sociologists claim that parents and other members of society often set a bad example. Discuss the cause and effects of widespread drug abuse by young people. Make any recommendations you feel are necessary to help fight youth drug abuse.
Some people believe that children should be allowed to stay at home and play until they are six or seven years old. Others believe that is important for young children to go to school as soon as possible. What do you think are the advantages of attending school from a young age?
Every country should have a free health service; even if that means that the latest medical treatments may not be available through this service because they are too expensive.
The exploration and development of safe alternatives to fossil fuels should be the most important global priority today.
Every country has poor people and every country has different ways of dealing with the poor. What are some of the reasons for poverty? What can we do to help the poor?
Popular hobbies and interests change over time and are more a reflection of trends and fashions than an indication of what individuals really want to do in their spare time.
Learning about the past has no value for those who live in the present.
Some workplaces do not ensure the safety of workers who use dangerous equipment. What can be done? Who should take responsibilities to ensure safety at workplaces?
The best way to travel is in a group led by a tour guide.
The highways department blames the high road toll on poor vehicle maintenance. However, there are strict laws regarding vehicle maintenance and road worthiness, and there are frequent inspections. The roads are very poor and badly maintained.
People who watch a lot of violent television programs will find that this influences their behaviour when they are angry or upset.
Laws should not be rigid or fixed. Instead, they should be flexible enough to take account of various circumstances, times and place of the offence.
Can computerised data collection on individuals be justified even though it endangers the rights of individuals?
Many people find it difficult to balance their responsibilities at home and in the workplace.
A number of different medical traditions are now widely known and used: Western medicine (using drugs and surgery), herbal medicine, acupuncture ( using needles at certain points of the body), homoeopathy (using minute doses of poisons), and so on. How important is the patient’s mental attitude towards his/her treatment in determining the effectiveness of the treatment?
Some people believe that university students are required to attend the classes. Others hold the view that going to classes should be optional for students.
Many people now have personal computers, and the use of electronic services such as the internet is becoming more widespread. Some parents are concerned about children using the internet to gamble or buy goods on credit. How can access to electronic services be controlled?
In the recent years, there has been an increase in the number of people killed on the road. Traffic designers blame drivers for driving too fast and drivers say the roads are bad. Who is to be blamed for the accidents deaths caused on roads?
A lot of films are now being made strictly for the DVD market and we are able to download films directly from the internet websites. How do you think this development is affecting cinema audiences? Is this a positive or a negative development?
Some people think that universities should provide graduates with the knowledge and skills needed in the workplace. Others think that the true function of a university should be to give access to knowledge for its own sake, regardless of whether the course is useful to an employer.
The growth in the job market is demanding for exit interviews with the employees. How far do you think it is relevant?
Should governments spend more money on improving roads and highways, or on improving public transportation (buses, trains, subways etc.)? Why?
The idea of having a single career is becoming an old fashioned one. The new fashion will be to have several careers or ways of earning money and further education will be something that continues throughout life.
Schools and libraries should ban computer games from their premises to stop students from wasting time.
Some employers reward members of staff for their exceptional contribution to the company by giving them extra money. This practice can act as an incentive for some but may also have a negative impact on others. To what extent is this style of management effective? Are there better ways of encouraging employees to work hard?
The private motor vehicle has greatly improved individual freedom of movement. Moreover, the automobile has become a status symbol. Yet the use of private motor vehicles has contributed to some of today’s most serious problems. How can the use of private motor vehicle be reduced?
It is frequently remarked that success is easy to attain but difficult to maintain.
A healthy person is often described as someone who has a good diet, gets lots of exercises and avoids stress. What should people do to stay fit?
It is always an individual who is the impetus for innovation; the details may be worked out by a team, but true innovation results from the enterprise and unique perception of an individual.
Some people say that smoking should be permitted in places where people gather to eat or drink. Others find the smell of smoke unpleasant and fear it is bad for everybody’s health.
There has been a huge increase in the size of cities. Many cities have grown in a haphazard way. Why is careful planning important in the development of cities?
Explain why the movies are as popular as a means of entertainment.
Failure is proof that the desire wasn’t strong enough.
Students can become very tired both emotionally and physically when they are preparing for an examination. How can they look after their health while they are studying?
These days noise and air pollution are serious environmental problems. Some people think that air travel is to be blamed. Others believe that we should reduce the number of vehicles on the roads.
Music is played in every society and culture in the world today. Some people think that music brings only benefits to the individuals and societies. Others, however, think that music can have a negative influence on both.
In the past, sports champions used to be motivated by the desire to win a match or to break the world records. These days, they are more likely to be motivated by prize money and the opportunity to be famous. What message does this send to young people and how does this attitude to sport affect the sports themselves?
Some people think that parents should teach their children how to be healthy and have a balanced diet. Others, however, believe that school is the best place to learn this.
It is the responsibility of a government to protect its citizens from natural disasters.
In some countries, government safety laws include things such as wearing a hard hat on a building site or wearing safety clothes in certain factories. To what extent are laws of this kind good idea? What sort of safety law would you introduce, if you were given a chance?
Some people prefer to live in a house, while others feel that there are more advantages to living in an apartment. Are there more advantages than disadvantages of living in a house compared with living in an apartment?
Some people think women should be allowed to join the army, the navy and the air force just like men.
To be labelled a ‘work of art’, a painting, sculpture or other art forms should display certain qualities that are unique. However, over the past century, there has been a decline in the quality of prize-winning artwork and it is now possible for quite ordinary pieces of art to be labelled ‘masterpiece’ whilst true works of art pass unnoticed.
Television, newspaper, and other media pay too much attention to the personal lives of famous people such as public figures and celebrities
Is freedom of speech necessary in a free society?
Under the British and Australian laws a jury in a criminal case has no access to information about the defendant’s past criminal record. This protects the person who is being accused of the crime. Some lawyers have suggested that this practice should be changed and that a jury should be given all the past facts before they reach their decision about the case.
Some people believe that it is fairer to assess a student’s ability based on their performance during the whole course rather than giving a formal examination at the end of the course.
Some people think that professional athletes make good role models for young people, while others believe they don’t.
An increasing number of people work from home these days and stay in touch with their office using computer technology.
Encouraging people to use public transport is the best way to solve traffic problems in cities.
When students are in large classes it is very hard for the teachers to give every student individual attention. What can educational authorities do about this?
A government’s role is only to provide defence capability and urban infrastructure (roads, water supplies, etc.). All other services (education, health, social security) should be provided by private groups or individuals in the community.
Do you think that school newspaper should be given the absolute free speech with no censorship from faculty advisors?
Discuss the advantage and disadvantage of giving international aids to poor countries.
The best way to reduce the number of traffic accidents is to make all young drivers complete a safe driving education course before being licensed to drive.
Happiness is considered very important in life.
Some people believe that teaching children at home is best for a child's development while others think that it is important for children to go to school.
As most people spend a major part of their adult life at work, job satisfaction is an important element of individual well-being.
Many parents use punishment to teach the difference between right and wrong to kids. Many people think that the punishment is necessary to help children learn the distinction.
Scientists contribute more to society, so science students should get more support.
In most of the countries, multinational companies and their products are becoming more and more important. This trend is seriously damaging our quality of life.
Some people believe that there should be fixed punishments for each type of crime. Others, however, argue that the circumstances of an individual crime, and the motivation for committing it, should always be taken into account when deciding on the punishment.
Education is recognised as vital to the future of any society in today’s world. Governments throughout the world should make education compulsory for all children between the ages of 5 and 15.
Young drug abuse is a serious problem nowadays in many countries. What are the reasons for this and what can be done to control it?
Modern societies need specialists in certain fields, but not in others. Some people, therefore, think that governments should pay university fees for students who study subjects that are needed by society. Those who choose to study less relevant subjects should not receive government funding. Would the advantages of such an educational policy outweigh the disadvantages?
In the recent years, the proportion of the world’s population living in cities has increased substantially. People have moved in ever growing numbers from rural to urban areas. As migration from rural areas to cities continues, it is inevitable that the infrastructure on these cities will collapse.
Modern technology, such as chemical fertiliser, is being used more nowadays. Some people think that it is dangerous to human health and has negative effects on local communities.
Some people feel that in order to improve the quality of our education we should encourage high school students to evaluate and criticise their teachers. Others feel that it will cause the loss of respect and discipline in the classroom.
In recent years some countries have experienced very rapid economic development. This has resulted in much higher standards of living in urban areas but not in the country sides. This situation may bring some problems for the country as a whole. What are these problems? How might they be reduced?
Some people believe that government spends too much money on space research while there are still a lot of problems on the earth.
In some countries, citizens are allowed to keep a gun in their home. Do the advantages of this outweigh the disadvantages?
Economic progress is one factor that is being considered to measure the success of a country, but there are other factors that should be considered when measuring the success of a country.
Nowadays many students have the opportunity to study for part or all of their courses in foreign countries. While studying abroad brings many benefits to individual students, it also has a number of disadvantages.
Some people think that cars should be banned from large cities.
More and more people these days work harder and longer hours and have no time for family life and friends. What are the causes in your opinion for this? How is it affecting family life and the society as a whole?
Waste disposal problems are increasing especially in urban areas. Suggest what government and individuals should do to help reduce the amount of rubbish production and disposal of it.
Some people claim that there are different ways of saving energy (electricity and gas), such as using energy for a shorter period of time in the workplace and not using electricity / gas once a week.
Some people prefer to spend more time improving their careers. Others think that it’s more important to spend time with family and friends.
In the recent years, there is a trend of ‘responsible tourism’, which pays attention to both local culture and environment. However, there are still people who think that ‘responsible tourism’ is impossible to implement in reality.
Students who go directly from school to university benefit less from and contribute less to their courses than those who take a job or travel in order to get more experience in ‘real world’ before they start higher education.
Computers and modems have made it possible for office workers to do much of their works from home instead of working in offices every day. Working from home should be encouraged as it is good for workers and employees.
It is said that day-by-day people’s lives are becoming increasingly stressful. What are the reasons behind that? What can be done to solve this problem?
Some people say that time and money spent on music classes in schools are not necessary. Instead, children should be learning useful subjects such as science and computers. 
We are seeing a significant increase in online shopping nowadays. What are the advantages of this trend?
For some people, the ideal holiday is to get away from their normal routine by staying in a hotel or camping in a countryside. Others prefer to stay at home and do things they do not normally have time for. What do you think are the benefits of going away on holidays?
Societies benefit from the closer relationship we have with foreigners through international tourism and business.
Some people think that technology has made our life too complex. However, other people think that it has made our life easier.
Nowadays companies and other organisations are requiring their employees to wear a uniform. What is your viewpoint on this?
Some say that young people are not suitable for decision-making positions in governments; others however disagree.
We have been living in the nuclear age now for over half a century. Since the first atomic bombs were developed, nuclear technology has provided governments with the ability to totally destroy the planet. Yet the technology has been put to positive use as an energy source and in certain areas of medicine.
Societies that don’t respect and honour their women can never make progress.
Some people think that in the modern world we are more dependent on each other, while others think that people have become more independent.
Some people think that governments should give financial support to creative artists such as painters and musicians. Others believe that creative artists should be funded by alternative sources.
In the developed world, average life expectancy is increasing. What problems will this cause for individuals and society? Suggest some measures that could be taken to reduce the impact of ageing populations.
Some people believe that hobbies need to be difficult to be enjoyable.
Several languages are in danger of extinction because they are spoken by very small numbers of people. Some people say that governments should spend public money on saving these languages, while others believe that would be a waste of money.
Foreign visitors should pay more than local visitors for cultural and historical attractions. To what extent do you agree or disagree with this opinion?
When choosing a job, the salary is the most important consideration.
In many countries nowadays, young single people no longer stay with their parents until they are married, but leave to study or work somewhere else. Do you think this trend has more advantages or disadvantages?
Some people regard video games as harmless fun, or even as a useful educational tool. Others, however, believe that videos games are having an adverse effect on the people who play them. In your opinion, do the drawbacks of video games outweigh the benefits?
We cannot help everyone in the world that needs help, so we should only be concerned with our own communities and countries.
Explain some of the ways in which humans are damaging the environment. What can governments do to address these problems? What can individual people do?
In order to solve traffic problems, governments should tax private car owners heavily and use the money to improve public transportation.
Nowadays celebrities are more famous for their glamour and wealth than for their achievements, and this sets a bad example to young people.
Some people believe the aim of university education is to help graduates get better jobs. Others believe there are much wider benefits of university education for both individuals and society.
The world is experiencing a dramatic increase in population. This is causing problems not only for the poor in undeveloped countries but also for industrialised and developing nations.
A growing number of people feel that animals should not be exploited by people and that they should have the same rights as humans, while others argue that humans must employ animals to satisfy their various needs, including uses for food and research.
Some people think that it is important to use leisure time for activities that improve the mind, such as reading and doing word puzzles. Other people feel that it is important to rest the mind during leisure time.
Government investment in the arts, such as music and theatre, is a waste of money. Governments must invest this money in public services instead.
Do you think that modern technology, such as the internet and computers will ever replace the book or the written word as the main source of information?
All over the world, societies are facing a growing problem with obesity. This problem affects both children and adults. What are the reasons for this rise in obesity? How could it be tackled?
In some countries children have very strict rules of behaviour, in other countries, they are allowed to do almost anything they want.
The presence of technology in the classroom has become more and more apparent and offers students tremendous resources with which to supplement their education. Given time, technology will completely replace the traditional teacher in the classroom.
Some say you should always marry for love; others say that in an uncertain world it's wiser to marry for money.
Many people believe that mobile phones cause more harms than the benefits and that's why mobile phones should be restricted?
In many parts of the world, there is continuous coverage of sport on television. Some people believe this discourages the young from taking part in any sport themselves.
Should state museums charge visiting fees or that should be completely free?
Some people think that men and women have different qualities. Therefore, some certain jobs are suitable for men and some jobs are suitable for women.
In some countries, using the internet in school is getting popular. Is it positive or negative development?
Nowadays it is more difficult for children to concentrate to pay attention in school.
It's generally believed that some people are born with certain talents, for instance for music and sport, and others are not. However, it's sometimes claimed that any child can be taught to become a good sports person or musician.
In many cities crime is increasing. Why do you think this is happening? What can governments do to help reduce crime levels?
Visitors should follow local customs and behaviours or the host country should welcome cultural differences?
An increased number of people today change their career and living places in their lives. Is it a positive or negative development?
People succeed because of their hard work; luck has nothing to do with success.
It has been proven that smoking kills. In some countries, it has been made illegal for people to smoke in all public places except in certain areas. All countries should make these rules.
These days many people leave their country to work abroad and take their family with them.
Some people think that parents should teach children how to be good members of society. Others, however, believe that school is the place to learn this.
Nowadays the way many people interact with each other has changed because of technology. In what ways has technology affected the types of relationships people make? Has this become a positive or negative development?
Coins and paper money will soon be replaced by credit and bank cards. Eventually, we will have a cashless society which will be safer and more convenient for everyone.
Some people believe that unpaid community service should be a compulsory part of high school programmers (for example working for a charity, improving the neighbourhood or teaching sports to younger children).
Some experts believe that it is better for children to begin learning a foreign language at primary school rather than secondary school.
Some people think that the teenage years are the happiest of our lives, while others believe that adult life brings more happiness.
The subjects that children are taught in schools are decided by central authorities. Some people say that teachers, not politicians, should be responsible for this task.
Some people think that children would benefit if they attend nursery school before primary school while some people think that children should stay all day with their families.
It's been seen that reading for pleasure develops imaginations and better language skills than to watch TV.
Nowadays most of the people believe individuals cannot do something to improve the environment, but Governments and large companies can make a difference.
Which one you think has more influence on people- the knowledge gained from experience or the knowledge gained from books.
It is often said that the subjects taught in schools are too academic in orientation and that it would be more useful for children to learn about practical matters such as home management, work and interpersonal skills.
In some countries, the average worker is obliged to retire at the age of 50, while in others people can work until they are 65 or 70. Meanwhile, we see some politicians enjoying power well into their eighties. Clearly, there is little agreement on an appropriate retirement age. Until what age do you think people should be encouraged to remain in paid employment?
Popular events like the football World Cup and other international sporting occasions are essential in easing international tensions and releasing patriotic emotions in a safe way.
Going overseas for university study is an exciting prospect for many people. But while it may offer some advantages, it is probably better to stay home because of the difficulties a student inevitably encounters living and studying in a different culture.
It has been more than 40 years since man first landed on the moon. Some people think that space research is a waste of money.
The rising levels of congestion and air pollution found in most of the world's cities can be attributed directly to the rapidly increasing number of private cars in use. In order to reverse this decline in the quality of life in cities, attempts must be made to encourage people to use their cars less and public transport more.
"Telecommuting" refers to workers doing their jobs from home for part of each week and communicating with their office using computer technology. Telecommuting is growing in many countries and is expected to be common for most office workers in the coming decades.
Children below the age of sixteen should not be allowed in public places after midnight unless they are accompanied by an adult who is responsible for them.
It is generally acknowledged that families are now not as close as they used to be.
Many people think that nowadays people are being subjected to more and more pressure in their work, and thus are having less and less time to relax. What is your opinion?
Some people think that they can learn better by themselves than with a teacher. Others think that it is always better to have a teacher. Which one do you prefer?
People learn in different ways. Some people learn by doing things; other people learn by reading about things; others learn by listening to people talk about things. Which of these methods of learning is best for you?
In general, people are living longer now. Discuss the causes of this phenomenon.
Some people think that human needs for farmland, housing, and industry are more important than saving land for endangered animals.
Some people prefer to work for themselves or own a business. Others prefer to work for an employer. Would you rather be self-employed, work for someone else, or own a business?
Many people have a close relationship with their pets. These people treat their birds, cats, or other animals as members of their family. In your opinion, are such relationships good? Why or why not?
Every generation of people is different in important ways. How is your generation different from your parents’ generation?
Boys and girls should attend separate schools.
Reading fiction (such as novels and short stories) is more enjoyable than watching movies.
Neighbours are the people who live near us. In your opinion, what are the qualities of a good neighbour?
Universities should give the same amount of money to their students’ sports activities as they give to their university libraries.
Some high schools require all students to wear school uniforms. Other high schools permit students to decide what to wear to school. Which of these two school policies do you think is better?
In some countries, people are no longer allowed to smoke in many public places and office buildings. Do you think this is a good rule or a bad rule?
Many students have to live with roommates while going to school or university. What are some of the important qualities of a good roommate?
In your country, is there more need for land to be left in its natural condition or is there more need for land to be developed for housing and industry?
Some people trust their first impressions about a person’s character because they believe these judgments are generally correct. Other people do not judge a person’s character quickly because they believe first impressions are often wrong.
When students move to a new school, they sometimes face problems. How can schools help these students with their problems?
Some people prefer to plan activities for their free time very carefully. Others choose not to make any plans at all for their free time. Compare the benefits of planning free-time activities with the benefits of not making plans.
In some countries, teenagers have jobs while they are still students. Do you think this is a good idea? Support your opinion by using specific reasons and details.
Students at universities often have a choice of places to live. They may choose to live in university dormitories, or they may choose to live in apartments in the community. Compare the advantages of living in university housing with the advantages of living in an apartment in the community. Where would you prefer to live?
Which would you choose: a high-paying job with long hours that would give you a little time with family and friends or a lower-paying job with shorter hours that would give you more time with family and friends?
What do you consider to be the most important room in a house? Why is this room more important to you than any other room?
People should sometimes do things that they do not enjoy doing.
Plants can provide food, shelter, clothing, or medicine. What is one kind of plant that is important to you or the people in your country?
It has recently been announced that a new movie theatre may be built in your neighbourhood.
Teachers in different countries get different payments and many people say that teachers should be paid according to how much their students learn.
Many teachers assign homework to students every day. Do you think that daily homework is necessary for students?
Choose one of the following transportation vehicles and explain why you think it has changed people’s lives.
It is often said that education is more important these days than it ever had been. Is the ability to read and write more important today than in the past? Why or why not?
Some people believe that only teachers should not assess students as students should be allowed to do that as well. According to their view, schools should ask students to evaluate their teachers.
It is more important for students to study history and literature than it is for them to study science and mathematics.
A company is going to give some money either to support the arts or to protect the environment. Which do you think the company should choose?
Some people believe that success in life comes from taking risks or chances. Others believe that success results from careful planning.
Should governments spend more money on improving roads and highways, or should governments spend more money on improving public transportation (buses, trains, subways)? Why?
Groups or organizations are an important part of some people’s lives. Why are groups or organizations important to people?
Some people think that governments should spend as much money as possible on developing or buying computer technology. Other people disagree and think that this money should be spent on more basic needs.
Most experiences in our lives that seemed difficult at the time become valuable lessons for the future.
Parents or other adult relatives should make important decisions for their (13 to 19 year-old) teenage children.
Some people like to travel with a companion. Other people prefer to travel alone. Which one do you prefer?
Only people who earn a lot of money are successful.
Some activities and sports are harmless and do not involve risks but some others involve risks and dangers and yet people are attracted to these activities. Why do you think some people are attracted to dangerous sports or other dangerous activities?
Some people like to do only what they already do well. Other people prefer to try new things and take risks. Which one do you prefer?
Some universities require students to take classes in many subjects. Other universities require students to specialize in one subject. Which one is better?
Some people spend their entire lives in one place. Others move a number of times throughout their lives, looking for a better job, house, community, or even climate. Which do you prefer: staying in one place or moving in search of another place?
Grades (marks) encourage students to learn.
Face-to-face communication is better than other types of communications, such as letters, emails, or telephone calls.
Dancing plays an important role in a culture.
People work because they need money to live. What are some other reasons that people work?
Describe a custom from your country that you would like people from other countries to adopt.
With the help of technology, students nowadays can learn more information and learn it more quickly.
Holidays honor people or events. If you could create a new holiday, what person or event would it honor and how would you want people to celebrate it?
There is nothing that young people can teach older people.
High schools should allow students to study the courses that students want to study.
Some people think that children should begin their formal education at a very early age and should spend most of their time on school studies. Others believe that young children should spend most of their time playing. Compare these two views.
Businesses should do anything they can to make a profit.
People should read only those books that are about real events, real people, and established facts.
It is sometimes said that borrowing money from a friend can harm or damage the friendship.
Attending a live performance (for example, a play, concert, or sporting event) is more enjoyable than watching the same event on television.
Modern technology now allows rapid and uncontrolled access to and exchange of information. Far from being beneficial, this is a danger to our societies.
Many children are forced to stay at school and study subjects that will be of little value to them in the future. These children may disrupt the education of the majority and should be allowed to leave school early to find themselves a job.
In some societies, it is increasingly common to try to achieve good health and fitness through physically demanding sports, special diets, or preventative medicine conventional or alternative. Some people, however, believe that the best way to stay fit and healthy is simply to lead a normal life.
Are computers essential features of modern education? What subjects can be better taught using computers? Are there aspects of a good education that cannot be taught using computers?
Nowadays, education overseas has become more accessible and growing numbers of people send their offspring to study in other countries. However, this trend has its detractors.
Some people prefer to work for the same company, whereas others prefer to change jobs frequently. Write about the advantages and disadvantages of each viewpoint?
Using a computer every day can have more negative than positive effects on young children.
Some movies are serious, designed to make the audience think. Other movies are designed primarily to amuse and entertain. Which type of movie do you prefer?
A lot of people believe that the amount of violence shown on TV and in the cinema affects the actions of our young people and therefore increases the amount of violence in our society today.
Millions of people every year move to English-speaking countries such as Australia, Britain or America, in order to study at school, college or university.
In the past, buildings often reflected the culture of a society but today all modern buildings look alike and cities throughout the world are becoming more and more similar. What do you think is the reason for this, and is it a good thing or a bad thing?
A gift (such as a camera, a soccer ball, or an animal) can contribute to a child’s development. What gift would you give to help a child develop? Why?
Advertising can tell you a lot about a country.
Space exploration requires vast sums of money. Is the amount of money spent on space research justifiable? Could the money be better spent?
Should museums and art galleries be free of charge for the general public, or should a charge, even a voluntary charge, be levied for admittance?
In many countries, more and more young people are leaving school but unable to find jobs. What problems do you think youth unemployment causes for individuals and the society? What measures should be taken to reduce the level of unemployment among youngsters?
Some people believe that air travel should be restricted because it causes serious pollution and uses up the world's fuel resources.
Some people think history has nothing or little to tell us, but others think that studying the past history can help us better understand the present.
In many countries, the proportion of older people is steadily increasing. Does this trend have more positive or negative effects on the society?
There are social, medical and technical problems associated with the use of mobile phones. What forms do they take? Do you agree that the problems outweigh the benefits of mobile phones?
Some people believe that they should keep all the money they have earned and should not pay tax to the state.
The increasing housing problem in big cities has social consequences. Some people say that only government can solve this problem.
Some businesses observe that people who just finished college have a hard time interacting with colleagues in working as a team. What do you think are the reasons behind this? What are your suggestions to address this problem?
Some people say that people should have a different amount of holidays according to their job. To what extent do you agree or disagree with this opinion?
Some people opine that damage to the environment is an inevitable consequence of the improvement in the standard of living.
Many people think that countries have a moral obligation to help each other, while other argue that the aid money is misspent by the governments that receive it, so the international aid should not be given to the poor countries in the world.
Many problems in schools are aroused by the attitudes of students. Where do these problems come from? What should we do to change the situation?
Traffic is a very serious problem. The pedestrians and bicycle riders are facing more and more danger. Many gardens become sacrifices to highways. What are the best ways to make the citizens satisfied?
Creative artists should always be given the freedom to express their own ideas (in words, pictures, music, film) in whichever way they wish. There should be no public or government restrictions on what they do.
Some people say that computers can translate languages, so children need not study foreign languages anymore.
More and more women go out to work. Is it the government's responsibility to subsidise them and provide free staff and facilities to care for their children?
Scientists use living animal to carry out research. Some people think it is interesting, while some other people think it is cruel. What is your opinion?
Over the past 50 years, young people have gained status and power but old people have lost. What is the cause and is it a good development or bad development?
TV, Internet and radio are very popular nowadays. Some people say that they will replace books and written words as the main sources of information.
When people grow older they need company but young people find it least preferable to spend time with old people. This is why many opine that older people should live separately. Should old men live with young people together in a family, or should they live in the clubs/retirement home for old men?
Many people say that the 9/11 is a significant world event that has changed the world. Discuss the influence on world economy and other aspects taken by 9/11 incident.
As reading is important for a good education, we should encourage our children to read whatever appeals to them.
Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of unisexual schools.
"Prevention is better than cure." Out of a country's health budget, a large proportion should be diverted from treatment to spending on health education and preventative measures.
Some people believe that children's leisure activities must be educational, otherwise they are a complete waste of time.
The mass media, including television, radio and newspapers, have great influence in shaping people's ideas.
Many people believe that television programs are of no value for children. Do you agree? Why or why not?
Today the high sales of popular consumer goods reflect the power of advertising and not the real needs of the society in which they are sold.
Children today are too dependent on computers and electronic entertainment. It would be better for them to be outside playing sports and taking part in more traditional pastimes than spending all day indoors.
Governments around the world are spending billions in support of space programs. This money would be better spent on research into improvements in human health.
Animals should not be used for the benefit of human beings unless there is evidence that the animals do not suffer in any way.
The Art should be better funded by the government but there must be more control over where the money goes.
Wild animals have no use in the 21st  century and trying to preserve animals now is just wastage of money.
There are many different types of music in the world today. Why do we need music? Is the traditional music of a country more important than the International music that is heard everywhere nowadays?
When people move to another country, some of them decide to follow the customs of the new country. Others prefer to keep their own customs. Compare these two choices. Which one do you prefer?
Some people think that a sense of competition in children should be encouraged. Others believe that children who are taught to co-operate rather than compete become more useful adults.
If you could study a subject that you have never had the opportunity to study, what would you choose?
The age of Information Technology has taken a lot of people by surprise. While it has become a way of life for some, others know very little about it and may be unlikely to learn. Eventually, we will have a polarized society and this will lead to serious social problems.
Financial education should be a mandatory component of the school program.
Television has had a significant influence on the culture of many societies. To what extent would you say that television has positively or negatively affected the cultural development of your society?
As computers are being used more and more in education, there will be soon no role for teachers in the classroom.
All education (primary, secondary and further education) should be free to all people and paid and managed by the government.
It is generally agreed that society benefits from the work of its members. Compare the contributions of artists to society with the contributions of scientists to society. Which type of contribution do you think is valued more by your society?
Some people think that it is important to have a single language as an international official language. Others think that it will make it difficult to identify countries and would cause a loss of culture.
When people need to complain about a product or poor service, some prefer to complain in writing and others prefer to complain in person.
The costs of medical health care are increasing all the time. Governments are finding it difficult to balance the health care budget. Should citizens be totally responsible for their own health costs and take out private health insurance, or is it better to have a comprehensive health care system which provides free health services for all?
You have the opportunity to visit a foreign country for two weeks. Which country would you like to visit?
It is widely believed that children of different levels of intelligence should be taught together, while others think that more intelligent children should be taught separately.
Some people prefer to work for a large company. Others prefer to work for a small company. Which one would you prefer?
Some people think that universities should not provide so much theoretical knowledge but give more practical training throughout their courses.
A foreign visitor has only one day to spend in your country. Where should this visitor go on that day? Why? Use specific reasons and details to support your choice.
Nowadays, education overseas has become more accessible and growing numbers of people send their offspring to study in other countries. However, this trend has its detractors.
We all work or will work in our jobs with many different kinds of people. In your opinion, what are some important characteristics of a co-worker (someone you work closely with)?
Classmates are a more important influence than parents on a child’s success in school.
Some people say the Government should not put money into building theaters and sports stadiums; they should spend more money on medical care and education.
As the world becomes technologically advanced, computers are replacing more and more jobs. Describe some job positions that may be lost because of computers, and discuss at least one problem that may result.
Research indicates that the characteristics we are born with have much more influence on our personality and development than any experiences we may have in our life.
Scientists and the news media are presenting ever more evidence of climate change. Governments cannot be expected to solve this problem. It is the responsibility of individuals to change their lifestyle to prevent further damage.
A person you know is planning to move to your town or city. What do you think this person would like and dislike about living in your town or city?
Traffic and housing problems in major cities could be solved by moving large companies and factories and their employees to the countryside.
What discovery in the last 100 years has been most beneficial for people in your country?
Watching television is bad for children.
People who have original ideas are of much greater value to society than those who are simply able to copy the ideas of others well.
Children should begin learning a foreign language as soon as they start school.
In some countries, marriages are arranged by the parents but in other cases, people choose their own marriage partner.
Fashion trends are difficult to follow these days and it’s widely believed that they primarily exist just to sell clothes. Some people believe that we shouldn’t follow them and that we should dress in what we like and feel comfortable in.
Business organisations should hire employees for their entire lives.
People have different job expectations for jobs. Some people prefer to do the same job for the same company, whereas others prefer to change jobs frequently.
Should a city try to preserve its old, historic buildings or destroy them and replace them with modern buildings?
Some people say that advertising encourages us to buy things that we really do not need. Others say that advertisements tell us about new products that may improve our lives.
A person should never make an important decision alone.
Television has destroyed communication among friends and family.
The number of overweight children in developed countries is increasing. Some people think this is due to problems such as the growing number of fast food outlets. Others believe that parents are to blame for not looking after their children's health.
Children should be required to help with household tasks as soon as they are able to do so.
Would you prefer to live in a traditional house or in a modern apartment building?
Some people enjoy change, and they look forward to new experiences. Others like their lives to stay the same, and they do not change their usual habits.
According to those in the travel business, the nature of the average 'holiday' is changing. Rather than seeking a relaxing break in a far-away place, people now want excitement on their holidays and are keen to participate in unusual and challenging activities.
What are some important qualities of a good supervisor?
In some countries, young people are encouraged to work or travel for a year between finishing high school and starting university studies.
You have decided to give several hours of your time each month to improve the community where you live. What is one thing you will do to improve your community? Why?
Companies should encourage employees who work in a high position to leave at the age of 55 in order to give opportunities to the new generation.
Nowadays, international tourism is the biggest industry in the world. Unfortunately, international tourism creates tension rather than understanding between people from different cultures.
It is better for children to grow up in the countryside than in a big city.
Children should never be educated at home by their parents.
Modern technology is creating a single world culture.
Some people say that computers have made life easier and more convenient. Other people say that computers have made life more complex and stressful.
By punishing murderers with the death penalty, society is also guilty of committing murder. Therefore, life in prison is a better punishment for murderers.
Successful sports professionals can earn a great deal more money than people in other important professions. Some people think this is fully justified while others think it is unfair.
Nowadays we are producing more and more rubbish. Why do you think this is happening? What can governments do to help reduce the amount of rubbish produced?
The government has announced that it plans to build a new university. Some people think that your community would be a good place to locate the university.
The first car appeared on British roads in 1888. By the year 2000, there may be as many as 29 million vehicles on the British roads. Alternative forms of transport should be encouraged and international laws introduced to control car ownership and use.
The threat of nuclear weapons maintains the world peace. Nuclear power provides cheap and clean energy. The benefits of nuclear technology far out-weight the disadvantages.
Some people prefer to eat at restaurants while others prefer to prepare and eat at home. Which  one do you prefer?
Tobacco should be treated as illegal like other drugs. Smoking has not a single positive issue but lots of negative effects and therefore, it should be banned.
Some people think that cities are the best places to live. Others prefer to live in a rural area. Compare the advantages and disadvantages of living in the city to living in the countryside.
Some people think children are more successful in foreign language studies than adults.
Improvements in health, education and trade are essential for the development of poorer nations. However, the governments of richer nations should take more responsibility for helping the poorer nations in such areas.
In many countries, children are engaged in some kind of paid work. Some people regard this as completely wrong, while others consider it as valuable work experience, important for learning and taking responsibility.
Some Governments say how many children a family can have in their country should be strictly controlled. They may control the number of children someone has through taxes. Is It sometimes necessary and right for a government to control the population in this way?
The position of women in society has changed markedly in the last twenty years. Many of the problems young people now experience, such as juvenile delinquency, arise from the fact that many married women now work and are not at home to care for their children.
When a country develops its technology, the traditional skills and ways of life die out. It is pointless to try and keep them alive.
Without capital punishment (the death penalty) our lives are less secure and crimes of violence increase. Capital punishment is essential to control violence in society.
Fatherhood ought to be emphasized as much as motherhood. The idea that women are solely responsible for deciding whether or not to have babies leads on to the idea that they are also responsible for bringing the children up.
News editors decide what to broadcast on television and what to print in newspapers. What factors do you think influence these decisions? Do we become used to bad news? Would it be better if more good news was reported?
Some people say that television is a very useful tool when it comes to education. Others argue that television is a much overused, ineffective teacher.
A University should accept male and female students equally in every subject.
The overuse of natural resources causes an ultimate exhaust of them. People have been using them to be in the swim of new styles such as making new furniture of recent design. This causes a huge harm to the environment. Therefore, the government should discourage people the overuse of these resources.
It is said that "Not everything that is learned is contained in books".
A company has announced that it wishes to build a large factory near your locality.
Some people claim that there are more disadvantages of the car than its advantages. Do you agree or disagree? Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of having a car.
Compare the advantages and disadvantages of three of the following as media for communicating information. State which three you consider the most effective.
We are becoming increasingly dependent on computers. They are used in business, hospitals, crime detection and even to fly planes. What things will they be used in the future? Is this dependence on computers a good thing or should we be more suspicious of their benefits?
Some people say that people remember special gifts or presents that they receive. Why do you think that is?
A zoo has no useful purpose.
The 21st century has begun. What changes do you think this new century will bring?
Men do most of the high-level jobs. Should the government encourage a certain percentage of these jobs to be reserved for women?
Do you support that the nuclear technology should be used for constructive purposes?
Nowadays, more and more foreign students are going to English-Speaking countries to learn the “international language – English". It is undoubtedly true that studying English in an English-speaking country is the best way, but it is not the only way to learn it.
Many office authorities impose a restriction on smoking within the office premises. Some governments have even banned smoking in all public places. This is a good idea but it takes away some of our freedom.
Safety standards are important when building people's homes. Who should be responsible for enforcing strict building codes – the government or the people who build the homes?
To solve the ever-increasing environmental hazards throughout the world, the best way is to increase the price of fuel.
Cricket has become more popular than the national sports in the sub-continental countries.
World history suggests that violence and conflict were more evident under male leadership than under female leadership. So, for peace to prevail, female leadership can be considered as a better option than male leadership.
Parents are the best teachers.
Many people believe that women make better parents than men and that is why they have the greater role in raising children in most societies. Others claim that men are just as good as women at parenting.
Nowadays food has become easier to prepare. Has this change improved the way people live?
People attend colleges or universities for many different reasons (for example, new experiences, career preparation, increased knowledge etc.). Why do you think people attend colleges or universities?
